Lolita, light of my life, fire of my loins. My sin, my soul. Lo-lee-ta:
the tip  of  the tongue taking a trip of three steps down the palate to tap,
at three, on the teeth. Lo. Lee. Ta.
     She was Lo, plain Lo, in the morning, standing four  feet  ten  in  one
sock.  She  was  Lola in slacks. She was Dolly at school. She was Dolores on
the dotted line. But in my arms she was always Lolita.
     Did she have a precursor? She did, indeed she did. In  point  of  fact,
there  might  have  been  no  Lolita  at  all had I not loved, one summer, a
certain initial girl-child. In a princedom by the sea.  Oh  when?  About  as
many  years before Lolita was born as my age was that summer. You can always
count on a murderer for a fancy prose style.
     Ladies and gentlemen of the  jury,  exhibit  number  one  is  what  the
seraphs, the misinformed, simple, noble-winged seraphs, envied. Look at this
tangle of thorns.


I  was  born  in  1910,  in  Paris.  My father was a gentle, easy-going
person, a salad of racial genes:  a  Swiss  citizen,  of  mixed  French  and
Austrian descent, with a dash of the Danube in his veins. I am going to pass
around  in  a  minute some lovely, glossy-blue picture-postcards. He owned a
luxurious hotel on the Riviera. His father and  two  grandfathers  had  sold
wine,  jewels  and silk, respectively. At thirty he married an English girl,
daughter of Jerome Dunn, the  alpinist,  and  granddaughter  of  two  Dorset
parsons,  experts  in  obscure  subjects--paleopedology  and  Aeolian harps,
respectively. My very photogenic mother died in a  freak  accident  (picnic,
lightning) when I was three, and, save for a pocket of warmth in the darkest
past,  nothing  of her subsists within the hollows and dells of memory, over
which, if you can still stand my style (I am writing under observation), the
sun of my infancy had set: surely, you all know those redolent  remnants  of
day  suspended,  with  the  midges,  about  some  hedge in bloom or suddenly
entered and traversed by the rambler, at the bottom of a hill, in the summer
dusk; a furry warmth, golden midges.
     My mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  my  father's  had
married  and  then  neglected,  served  in  my immediate family as a kind of
unpaid governess and housekeeper. Somebody told me later that she  had  been
in love with my father, and that he had lightheartedly taken advantage of it
one  rainy  day  and  forgotten  it  by  the time the weather cleared. I was
extremely fond of her, despite the rigidity--the fatal rigidity--of some  of
her  rules.  Perhaps  she  wanted  to make of me, in the fullness of time, a
better widower than my father. Aunt Sybil had pink-rimmed azure eyes  and  a
waxen  complexion.  She  wrote poetry. She was poetically superstitious. She
said she knew she would die soon after my sixteenth birthday, and  did.  Her
husband,  a  great  traveler in perfumes, spent most of his time in America,
where eventually he founded a firm and acquired a bit of real estate.
     I grew, a happy, healthy child in a bright would of illustrated  books,
clean  sand,  orange  trees,  friendly  dogs,  sea vistas and smiling faces.
Around me the splendid Hotel Mirana revolved as a kind of private  universe,
a  whitewashed  cosmos within the blue greater one that blazed outside. From
the aproned pot-scrubber to the flanneled  potentate,  everybody  liked  me,
everybody  petted  me. Elderly American ladies leaning on their canes listed
towards me like towers of Pisa. Ruined Russian princesses who could not  pay
my father, bought me expensive bonbons. He, mon cher petit papa, took
me out boating and biking, taught me to swim and dive and water-ski, read to
me  Don Quixote and Les Miserables, and I adored and respected
him and felt glad for him whenever I  overheard  the  servants  discuss  his
various  lady-friends,  beautiful  and  kind  beings who made much of me and
cooed and shed precious tears over my cheerful motherlessness.
     I attended an English day school a few miles from  home,  and  there  I
played  rackets and fives, and got excellent marks, and was on perfect terms
with schoolmates and teachers alike. The only definite sexual events that  I
can  remember  as  having  occurred  before my thirteenth birthday (that is,
before I first saw my little Annabel) were: a solemn,  decorous  and  purely
theoretical  talk  about pubertal surprises in the rose garden of the school
with an American kid, the son of a then  celebrated  motion-picture  actress
whom  he  seldom  saw  in  the three-dimensional world; and some interesting
reactions on the part of my  organism  to  certain  photographs,  pearl  and
umbra,  with  infinitely  soft  partings, in Pichon's sumptuous La Beautи
Humaine that that I had filched from under a  mountain  of  marble-bound
Graphics  in  the  hotel  library.  Later, in his delightful debonair
manner, my father gave me all the information he thought I needed about sex;
this was just before sending me, in the autumn of 1923, to a lycиe in
Lyon (where we were to spend three winters); but alas, in the summer of that
year, he was touring Italy with Mme de R. and her daughter, and I had nobody
to complain to, nobody to consult.

Annabel  was,  like  the  writer,  of  mixed  parentage:  half-English,
half-Dutch,  in  her case. I remember her features far less distinctly today
than I did a few years ago, before I knew Lolita. There  are  two  kinds  of
visual  memory:  one when you skillfully recreate an image in the laboratory
of your mind, with your eyes open (and then I see Annabel  in  such  general
terms  as:  "honey-colored  skin,"  "think arms," "brown bobbed hair," "long
lashes," "big bright mouth"); and the other when you instantly  evoke,  with
shut eyes, on the dark inner side of your eyelids, the objective, absolutely
optical  replica  of  a  beloved face, a little ghost in natural colors (and
this is how I see Lolita).
     Let me therefore primly limit myself, in describing Annabel, to  saying
she  was a lovely child a few months my junior. Her parents were old friends
of my aunt's, and as stuffy as she. They had rented a  villa  not  far  from
Hotel  Mirana.  Bald  brown  Mr.  Leigh  and  fat, powdered Mrs. Leigh (born
Vanessa van Ness). How I loathed them! At first, Annabel  and  I  talked  of
peripheral  affairs.  She  kept lifting handfuls of fine sand and letting it
pour  through  her  fingers.  Our  brains  were  turned  the  way  those  of
intelligent  European preadolescents were in our day and set, and I doubt if
much individual genius should be assigned to our interest in  the  plurality
of  inhabited worlds, competitive tennis, infinity, solipsism and so on. The
softness and fragility of baby animals caused us the same intense pain.  She
wanted  to  be  a  nurse  in some famished Asiatic country; I wanted to be a
famous spy.
     All at once we were madly, clumsily, shamelessly, agonizingly  in  love
with  each  other;  hopelessly,  I should add, because that frenzy of mutual
possession might have been  assuaged  only  by  our  actually  imbibing  and
assimilating  every  particle  of  each other's soul and flesh; but there we
were, unable even to mate as slum children would have  so  easily  found  an
opportunity  to  do.  After one wild attempt we made to meet at night in her
garden (of which more later), the only privacy we were allowed was to be out
of earshot but not out of sight on the populous part  of  the  plage.
There,  on  the  soft sand, a few feet away from our elders, we would sprawl
all morning, in a petrified paroxysm of desire, and take advantage of  every
blessed  quirk  in space and time to touch each other: her hand, half-hidden
in the sand, would creep toward me, its slender brown  fingers  sleepwalking
nearer  and nearer; then, her opalescent knee would start on a long cautious
journey; sometimes a chance rampart built by  younger  children  granted  us
sufficient  concealment  to  graze each other's salty lips; these incomplete
contacts drove our healthy and inexperienced young bodies to such a state of
exasperation that not even the cold blue water, under which we still  clawed
at each other, could bring relief.
     Among  some  treasures  I lost during the wanderings of my adult years,
there was a snapshot taken by my aunt which showed Annabel, her parents  and
the  staid,  elderly,  lame  gentleman,  a  Dr. Cooper, who that same summer
courted my aunt, grouped around a table in a sidewalk cafe. Annabel did  not
come  out well, caught as she was in the act of bending over her chocolat
glacи, and her thin bare shoulders and the parting  in  her  hair  were
about  all  that  could  be identified (as I remember that picture) amid the
sunny blur into which her lost loveliness graded; but  I,  sitting  somewhat
apart  from  the  rest,  came out with a kind of dramatic conspicuousness: a
moody, beetle-browed boy in a  dark  sport  shirt  and  well-tailored  white
shorts,  his legs crossed, sitting in profile, looking away. That photograph
was taken on the last day of our fatal summer and just a few minutes  before
we  made our second and final attempt to thwart fate. Under the flimsiest of
pretexts (this was our very last chance, and  nothing  really  mattered)  we
escaped  from  the  cafe to the beach, and found a desolate stretch of sand,
and there, in the violet shadow of some red rocks forming a  kind  of  cave,
had  a  brief  session  of  avid  caresses,  with  somebody's  lost  pair of
sunglasses for only witness. I  was  on  my  knees,  and  on  the  point  of
possessing  my darling, when two bearded bathers, the old man of the sea and
his brother, came out of the sea with exclamations of ribald  encouragement,
and four months later she died of typhus in Corfu.


I  leaf  again  and  again  through  these miserable memories, and keep
asking myself, was it then, in the glitter of that remote summer,  that  the
rift  in  my  life began; or was my excessive desire for that child only the
first evidence of an inherent singularity? When I  try  to  analyze  my  own
cravings,  motives,  actions  and  so  forth,  I  surrender  to  a  sort  of
retrospective imagination which feeds the analytic  faculty  with  boundless
alternatives  and  which  causes  each  visualized route to fork and re-fork
without end in the maddeningly complex prospect of my past. I am  convinced,
however, that in a certain magic and fateful way Lolita began with Annabel.
     I  also  know  that  the  shock  of  Annabel's  death  consolidated the
frustration of that nightmare summer, made of it a permanent obstacle to any
further romance throughout the cold years of my youth. The spiritual and the
physical had  been  blended  in  us  with  a  perfection  that  must  remain
incomprehensible  to  the matter-of-fact, crude, standard-brained youngsters
of today. Long after her death I felt her thoughts  floating  through  mine.
Long  before  we met we had had the same dreams. We compared notes. We found
strange affinities. The same June of the same year (1919) a stray canary had
fluttered into her house and mine, in two widely  separated  countries.  Oh,
Lolita, had you loved me thus!
     I have reserved for the conclusion of my "Annabel" phase the account of
our unsuccessful  first tryst. One night, she managed to deceive the vicious
vigilance of her family. In a nervous and slender-leaved mimosa grove at the
back of their villa we found a perch on the  ruins  of  a  low  stone  wall.
Through  the  darkness  and  the tender trees we could see the arabesques of
lighted windows which, touched up by the colored inks of  sensitive  memory,
appear  to  me  now like playing cards--presumably because a bridge game was
keeping the enemy busy. She trembled and twitched as I kissed the corner  of
her  parted  lips  and  the  hot  lobe of her ear. A cluster of stars palely
glowed above us, between the silhouettes of long thin leaves;  that  vibrant
sky  seemed as naked as she was under her light frock. I saw her face in the
sky, strangely distinct, as if it emitted a faint radiance of its  own.  Her
legs,  her  lovely  live legs, were not too close together, and when my hand
located what it  sought,  a  dreamy  and  eerie  expression,  half-pleasure,
half-pain,  came  over those childish features. She sat a little higher than
I, and whenever in her solitary ecstasy she was led to  kiss  me,  her  head
would  bend  with  a sleepy, soft, drooping movement that was almost woeful,
and her bare knees caught and compressed my wrist, and slackened again;  and
her  quivering  mouth,  distorted by the acridity of some mysterious potion,
with a sibilant intake of breath came near to my  face.  She  would  try  to
relieve the pain of love by first roughly rubbing her dry lips against mine;
then  my  darling  would draw away with a nervous toss of her hair, and then
again come darkly near and let me feed on  her  open  mouth,  while  with  a
generosity  that  was ready to offer her everything, my heart, my throat, my
entrails, I have her to hold in her awkward fist the scepter of my passion.
     I recall the scent of some kind of toilet powder--I believe  she  stole
it  from  her  mother's  Spanish  maid--a sweetish, lowly, musky perfume. It
mingled with her own biscuity odor, and my senses were  suddenly  filled  to
the  brim;  a  sudden  commotion  in  a  nearby  bush  prevented  them  from
overflowing--and as we drew away from each  other,  and  with  aching  veins
attended  to what was probably a prowling cat, there came from the house her
mother's voice calling her, with  a  rising  frantic  note--and  Dr.  Cooper
ponderously  limped  out into the garden. But that mimosa grove--the haze of
stars, the tingle, the flame, the honey-dew, and the ache remained with  me,
and  that  little  girl  with her seaside limbs and ardent tongue haunted me
ever since--until at last, twenty-four years later, I  broke  her  spell  by
incarnating her in another.


The  days of my youth, as I look back on them, seem to fly away from me
in a flurry of pale repetitive scraps like those morning snow storms of used
tissue paper that a train  passenger  sees  whirling  in  the  wake  of  the
observation  car.  In  my  sanitary  relations  with  women I was practical,
ironical and brisk. While a college  student,  in  London  and  Paris,  paid
ladies  sufficed  me.  My  studies were meticulous and intense, although not
particularly fruitful. At first, I planned to take a  degree  in  psychiatry
and  many  manquи  talents do; but I was even more manquи than
that; a peculiar exhaustion, I am  so  oppressed,  doctor,  set  in;  and  I
switched  to  English  literature,  where  so  many  frustrated poets end as
pipe-smoking teachers in tweeds. Paris suited me. I discussed Soviet  movies
with  expatriates.  I  sat  with  uranists  in  the Deux Magots. I published
tortuous essays in obscure journals. I composed pastiches:

     ...Frдulen von Kulp
     may turn, her hand upon the door;
     I will not follow her. Nor Fresca. Nor
     that Gull.

     A paper of mine entitled "The Proustian theme in a letter from Keats to
Benjamin Bailey" was chuckled over by the six or seven scholars who read it.
I launched upon an "Histoire abregиe de la  poиsie  anglaise"  for  a
prominent publishing firm, and then started to compile that manual of French
literature  for  English-speaking  students  (with  comparisons  drawn  from
English writers) which was to occupy me throughout the forties--and the last
volume of which was almost ready for press by the time of my arrest.
     I found a job--teaching English to a group of adults in Auteuil. Then a
school for boys employed me for a couple of winters. Now  and  then  I  took
advantage  of  the  acquaintances  I  had  formed  among  social workers and
psychotherapists to visit in their company  various  institutions,  such  as
orphanages  and  reform  schools,  where  pale  pubescent  girls with matted
eyelashes could be stared at in perfect impunity remindful of  that  granted
one in dreams.
     Now  I  wish to introduce the following idea. Between the age limits of
nine and fourteen there occur maidens who, to certain  bewitched  travelers,
twice  or  many times older than they, reveal their true nature which is not
human, but nymphic (that is, demoniac); and these chosen creatures I propose
to designate as "nymphets."
     It will be marked that I substitute time terms  for  spatial  ones.  In
fact,   I   would   have  the  reader  see  "nine"  and  "fourteen"  as  the
boundaries--the mirrory beaches  and  rosy  rocks--of  an  enchanted  island
haunted  by  those  nymphets  of  mine  and surrounded by a vast, misty sea.
Between those age limits, are all girl-children  nymphets?  Of  course  not.
Otherwise,  we  who are in the know, we lone voyagers, we nympholepts, would
have long gone insane. Neither are good looks any criterion; and  vulgarity,
or  at  least  what  a given community terms so, does not necessarily impair
certain mysterious characteristics, the  fey  grace,  the  elusive,  shifty,
soul-shattering,  insidious  charm  that  separates  the  nymphet  from such
coevals of hers as are incomparably more dependent on the spatial  world  of
synchronous phenomena than on that intangible island of entranced time where
Lolita  plays  with her likes. Within the same age limits the number of true
nymphets is trickingly inferior to that  of  provisionally  plain,  or  just
nice,  or  "cute,"  or  even  "sweet"  and "attractive," ordinary, plumpish,
formless, cold-skinned, essentially human little  girls,  with  tummies  and
pigtails,  who  may or may not turn into adults of great beauty (look at the
ugly dumplings in black stockings and white hats that are metamorphosed into
stunning stars of the screen). A normal man  given  a  group  photograph  of
school  girls  or  Girl Scouts and asked to point out the comeliest one will
not necessarily choose the nymphet among them. You have to be an artist  and
a  madman, a creature of infinite melancholy, with a bubble of hot poison in
your loins and a super-voluptuous flame permanently  aglow  in  your  subtle
spine  (oh,  how you have to cringe and hide!), in order to discern at once,
by  ineffable  signs--the  slightly  feline  outline  of  a  cheekbone,  the
slenderness  of  a downy limb, and other indices which despair and shame and
tears of tenderness forbid me to tabulate--the little deadly demon among the
wholesome children; she stands unrecognized by them  and  unconscious
herself of her fantastic power.
     Furthermore,  since  the  idea  of  time plays such a magic part in the
matter, the student should not be surprised to learn that there  must  be  a
gap  of several years, never less than ten I should say, generally thirty or
forty, and as many as ninety in a few known cases, between maiden and man to
enable the latter to come under a nymphet's spell. It is a question of focal
adjustment, of a certain distance that the inner eye  thrills  to  surmount,
and  a  certain  contrast  that  the  mind perceives with a gasp of perverse
delight. When I was a child and she was a child, my little  Annabel  was  no
nymphet  to  me;  I  was  her equal, a faunlet in my own right, on that same
enchanted island of time; but today, in September  1952,  after  twenty-nine
years have elapsed, I think I can distinguish in her the initial fateful elf
in  my  life.  We  loved  each  other  with  a  premature  love, marked by a
fierceness that so often destroys adult  lives.  I  was  a  strong  lad  and
survived; but the poison was in the wound, and the wound remained ever open,
and  soon  I found myself maturing amid a civilization which allows a man of
twenty-five to court a girl of sixteen but not a girl of twelve.
     No wonder, then, that my adult life during the European  period  of  my
existence  proved  monstrously  twofold.  Overtly,  I  had  so-called normal
relationships with a number of terrestrial women having  pumpkins  or  pears
for  breasts;  inly,  I was consumed by a hell furnace of localized lust for
every passing nymphet whom as a law-abiding poltroon I never dared approach.
The human females I was allowed to wield were but palliative  agents.  I  am
ready to believe that the sensations I derived from natural fornication were
much  the  same  as  those  known  to normal big males consorting with their
normal big mates in that routine rhythm which shakes the world. The  trouble
was  that  those  gentlemen had not, and I had, caught glimpses of an
incomparably more poignant bliss. The dimmest of my pollutive dreams  was  a
thousand times more dazzling than all the adultery the most virile writer of
genius  or  the  most talented impotent might imagine. My world was split. I
was aware of not one but two sexes, neither of which was mine; both would be
termed female by the anatomist. But to me, through the prism of  my  senses,
"they were as different as mist and mast." All this I rationalize now. In my
twenties  and  early  thirties,  I  did  not  understand  my throes quite so
clearly. While my body knew what it craved for, my mind rejected  my  body's
every  plea.  One  moment  I  was ashamed and frightened, another recklessly
optimistic.  Taboos  strangulated   me.   Psychoanalysts   wooed   me   with
pseudoliberations  of pseudolibidoes. The fact that to me the only object of
amorous tremor were sisters of  Annabel's,  her  handmaids  and  girl-pages,
appeared  to me at times as a forerunner of insanity. At other times I would
tell myself that it was all a question of attitude, that  there  was  really
nothing  wrong in being moved to distraction by girl-children. Let me remind
my reader that in England, with the passage of the Children and Young Person
Act in 1933, the term "girl-child" is defined as "a girl who is  over  eight
but  under  fourteen  years"  (after  that,  from fourteen to seventeen, the
statutory definition is "young person").  In  Massachusetts,  U.S.,  on  the
other  hand,  a  "wayward  child"  is,  technically,  one "between seven and
seventeen years of age" (who, moreover, habitually associates  with  vicious
or immoral persons). Hugh Broughton, a writer of controversy in the reign of
James  the  First,  has  proved that Rahab was a harlot at ten years of age.
This is all very interesting, and I daresay you see me already  frothing  at
the  mouth in a fit; but no, I am not; I am just winking happy thoughts into
a little tiddle cup. Here are some more pictures. Here is Virgil  who  could
the  nymphet sing in a single tone, but probably preferred a lad's perineum.
Here are two of  King  Akhnaten's  and  Queen  Nefertiti's  pre-nubile  Nile
daughters  (that royal couple had a litter of six), wearing nothing but many
necklaces of bright beads, relaxed on cushions, intact after three  thousand
years,  with their soft brown puppybodies, cropped hair and long ebony eyes.
Here are some brides of ten compelled to seat themselves  on  the  fascinum,
the  virile  ivory  in  the  temples  of classical scholarship. Marriage and
cohabitation before the age of puberty are still  not  uncommon  in  certain
East  Indian  provinces.  Lepcha  old  men  of eighty copulate with girls of
eight, and nobody minds. After all, Dante fell madly in love  with  Beatrice
when  she  was nine, a sparkling girleen, painted and lovely, and bejeweled,
in a crimson frock, and this was in 1274, in Florence, at a private feast in
the merry month of May. And when  Petrarch  fell  madly  in  love  with  his
Laureen, she was a fair-haired nymphet of twelve running in the wind, in the
pollen and dust, a flower in flight, in the beautiful plain as descried from
the hills of Vaucluse.
     But  let  us  be  prim  and civilized. Humbert Humbert tried hard to be
good. Really and truly, he id.  He  had  the  utmost  respect  for  ordinary
children,  with  their  purity and vulnerability, and under no circumstances
would he have interfered with the innocence of a child,  if  there  was  the
least risk of a row. But how his heart beat when, among the innocent throng,
he  espied  a  demon  child,  "enfant charmante et fourbe," dim eyes,
bright lips, ten years in jail if you only show her you are looking at  her.
So  life went. Humbert was perfectly capable of intercourse with Eve, but it
was Lilith he longed for. The bud-stage of breast development appears  early
(10.7 years) in the sequence of somatic changes accompanying pubescence. And
the  next  maturational  item available is the first appearance of pigmented
pubic hair (11.2 years). My little cup brims with tiddles.
     A shipwreck. An atoll.  Alone  with  a  drowned  passenger's  shivering
child.  Darling,  this  is  only  a  game!  How  marvelous  were  my fancied
adventures as I sat on a hard park bench pretending  to  be  immersed  in  a
trembling  book.  Around the quiet scholar, nymphets played freely, as if he
were a familiar statue or part of an old tree's shadow  and  sheen.  Once  a
perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock, with a clatter put her heavily
armed foot near me upon the bench to dip her slim  bare  arms  into  me  and
righten  the  strap of her roller skate, and I dissolved in the sun, with my
book for fig leaf, as her auburn ringlets fell all over  her  skinned  knee,
and  the  shadow  of leaves I shared pulsated and melted on her radiant limb
next to my chameleonic cheek. Another time a  red-haired  school  girl  hung
over  me in the metro, and a revelation of axillary russet I obtained
remained in my blood for weeks.  I  could  list  a  great  number  of  these
one-sided  diminutive romances. Some of them ended in a rich flavor of hell.
It happened for instance that from my  balcony  I  would  notice  a  lighted
window  across  the  street  and  what  looked  like a nymphet in the act of
undressing before a co-operative mirror. Thus isolated,  thus  removed,  the
vision  acquired  an  especially keen charm that made me race with all speed
toward my lone gratification. But abruptly, fiendishly, the  tender  pattern
of  nudity  I  had  adored would be transformed into the disgusting lamp-lit
bare arm of a man in his underclothes reading his paper by the  open  window
in the hot, damp, hopeless summer night.
     Rope-skipping,  hopscotch. That old woman in black who sat down next to
me on my bench, on my rack of joy (a nymphet was groping under me for a lost
marble), and asked if I had stomachache, the  insolent  hag.  Ah,  leave  me
alone  in  my  pubescent  park,  in my mossy garden. Let them play around me
forever. Never grow up.


A propos: I have often wondered what became of those nymphets later? In
this wrought-iron would of criss-cross cause and effect, could  it  be  that
the hidden throb I stole from them did not affect their future? I had
possessed  her--and  she  never  knew  it.  All right. But would it not tell
sometime later? Had I not somehow tampered with her fate  by  involving  her
image  in  my  voluptas?  Oh,  it  was,  and  remains, a source of great and
terrible wonder.
     I learned, however, what they looked  like,  those  lovely,  maddening,
thin-armed nymphets, when they grew up. I remember walking along an animated
street on a gray spring afternoon somewhere near the Madeleine. A short slim
girl  passed  me  at a rapid, high-heeled, tripping step, we glanced back at
the same moment, she stopped and I accosted her. She came hardly  up  to  my
chest  hair  and  had  the kind of dimpled round little face French girls so
often have, and I liked her long lashes  and  tight-fitting  tailored  dress
sheathing  in  pearl-gray  her young body which still retained--and that was
the nymphic echo, the chill of delight, the leap  in  my  loins--a  childish
something  mingling  with  the professional fretillement of her small
agile rump. I asked her price,  and  she  promptly  replied  with  melodious
silvery  precision  (a  bird, a very bird!) "Cent." I tried to haggle
but she saw the awful lone longing in my lowered eyes, directed so far  down
at  her  round  forehead  and rudimentary hat (a band, a posy); and with one
beat of her lashes: "Tant pis," she said, and  made  as  if  to  move
away.  Perhaps  only  three  years earlier I might have seen her coming home
from school! That evocation settled the matter. She  led  me  up  the  usual
steep  stairs,  with the usual bell clearing the way for the monsieur
who might not care to meet another monsieur, on the mournful climb to
the abject room, all bed and bidet. As usual, she asked at  once  for
her petit cadeau, and as usual I asked her name (Monique) and her age
(eighteen).   I   was   pretty   well  acquainted  with  the  banal  way  of
streetwalkers. They all answer "dix-huit"--a trim twitter, a note  of
finality  and  wistful  deceit  which they emit up to ten times per day, the
poor little creatures. But in Monique's case there could  be  no  doubt  she
was,  if  anything,  adding one or two years to her age. This I deduced from
many details of her compact, neat, curiously immature body. Having shed  her
clothes  with fascinating rapidity, she stood for a moment partly wrapped in
the dingy gauze of the window curtain listening with infantile pleasure,  as
pat  as  pat  could  be,  to an organ-grinder in the dust-brimming courtyard
below. When I examined her small hands  and  drew  her  attention  to  their
grubby  fingernails,  she  said  with  a  naive  frown "Oui, ce n'est pas
bien," and went to the wash-basin, but I said it did not matter, did not
matter at all. With her brown bobbed hair, luminous gray eyes and pale skin,
she looked perfectly charming. Her hips were  no  bigger  than  those  of  a
squatting  lad;  in  fact,  I do not hesitate to say (and indeed this is the
reason why I linger gratefully in that gauze-gray room of memory with little
Monique) that among the eighty or so grues I had had operate upon me,
she was the only one that gave me a pang of genuine pleasure.  "Il иtait
malin,  celui  qui a inventи ce truc-la," she commented amiably, and got
back into her clothes with the same high-style speed.
     I asked for another, more elaborate, assignment later the same evening,
and she said she would meet me at the corner cafe at nine, and swore she had
never pose un lapin in all her young life. We returned  to  the  same
room,  and  I  could  not  help  saying how very pretty she was to which she
answered demurely: "Tu es bien gentil de dire ca" and then,  noticing
what  I  noticed  too  in the mirror reflecting our small Eden--the dreadful
grimace of clenched-teeth tenderness that distorted my mouth--dutiful little
Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!)  wanted  to  know  if  she
should remove the layer of red from her lips avant qu'on se couche in
case  I  planned  to kiss her. Of course, I planned it. I let myself go with
her more completely than I had with any  young  lady  before,  and  my  last
vision  that night of long-lashed Monique is touched up with a gaiety that I
find seldom associated with any event in my  humiliating,  sordid,  taciturn
love  life.  She  looked tremendously pleased with the bonus of fifty I gave
her as she trotted out into the April night  drizzle  with  Humbert  Humbert
lumbering in her narrow wake. Stopping before a window display she said with
great  gusto: "Je vais m'acheter des bas!" and never may I forget the
way her Parisian childish lips exploded on "bas," pronouncing it with
an appetite that all but changed the "a" into a brief buoyant  bursting  "o"
as in "bot".
     I had a date with her next day at 2.15 P.M. in my own rooms, but it was
less successful,  she  seemed  to  have grown less juvenile, more of a woman
overnight. A cold I caught from her led me to cancel  a  fourth  assignment,
nor  was  I  sorry to break an emotional series that threatened to burden me
with heart-rending fantasies and peter out in dull  disappointment.  So  let
her  remain,  sleek,  slender  Monique,  as  she  was for a minute or two: a
delinquent nymphet shining through the matter-of-fact young whore.
     My brief acquaintance with her started a train of thought that may seem
pretty obvious to the reader who knows the ropes. An advertisement in a lewd
magazine landed me, one brave day, in the office of a Mlle Edith  who  began
by  offering  me to choose a kindred soul from a collection of rather formal
photographs  in  a  rather  soiled  album  ("Regardez-moi   cette   belle
brune!".  When  I pushed the album away and somehow managed to blurt out
my criminal craving, she looked as if about to show me  the  door;  however,
after  asking  me what price I was prepared to disburse, she condescended to
put me in touch with a person qui pourrait arranger  la  chose.  Next
day,  an  asthmatic  woman,  coarsely  painted, garrulous, garlicky, with an
almost farcical Provenгal accent and a black mustache above  a  purple  lip,
took  me  to  what  was  apparently  her  own  domicile,  and  there,  after
explosively kissing the bunched tips of  her  fat  fingers  to  signify  the
delectable rosebud quality of her merchandise, she theatrically drew aside a
curtain  to reveal what I judged was that part of the room where a large and
unfastidious family usually slept. It was now empty save for  a  monstrously
plump,  sallow, repulsively plain girl of at least fifteen with red-ribboned
thick black braids who sat on a chair perfunctorily  nursing  a  bald  doll.
When  I  shook  my  head  and  tried  to shuffle out of the trap, the woman,
talking fast,  began  removing  the  dingy  woolen  jersey  from  the  young
giantess' torso; then, seeing my determination to leave, she demanded son
argent.  A  door  at the end of the room was opened, and two men who had
been dining in the kitchen joined in  the  squabble.  They  were  misshapen,
bare-necked, very swarthy and one of them wore dark glasses. A small boy and
a begrimed, bowlegged toddler lurked behind them. With the insolent logic of
a  nightmare,  the enraged procuress, indicating the man in glasses, said he
had served in the police, lui, so that I had better do as I was told.
I went up to Marie--for that was her stellar name--who by then  had  quietly
transferred  her  heavy haunches to a stool at the kitchen table and resumed
her interrupted soup while the toddler picked up the doll. With a  surge  of
pity   dramatizing  my  idiotic  gesture,  I  thrust  a  banknote  into  her
indifferent hand. She surrendered my gift to the ex-detective,  whereupon  I
was suffered to leave.



I  do  not  know if the pimp's album may not have been another link in
the daisy-chain; but soon after, for my own safety, I decided to  marry.  It
occurred to me that regular hours, home-cooked meals, all the conventions of
marriage, the prophylactic routine of its bedroom activities and, who knows,
the  eventual  flowering  of  certain  moral  values,  of  certain spiritual
substitutes, might help me, if not to  purge  myself  of  my  degrading  and
dangerous  desires,  at  least  to keep them under pacific control. A little
money that had come my way after my father's death (nothing very  grand--the
Mirana  had  been  sold long before), in addition to my striking if somewhat
brutal good looks, allowed me to enter upon my quest with equanimity.  After
considerable  deliberation,  my  choice  fell  on  the  daughter of a Polish
doctor: the good man happened to be treating me for spells of dizziness  and
tachycardia. We played chess; his daughter watched me from behind her easel,
and  inserted eyes or knuckles borrowed from me into the cubistic trash that
accomplished misses then painted instead of lilacs and lambs. Let me  repeat
with  quiet  force:  I  was,  and  still am, despite mes malheurs, an
exceptionally handsome male; slow-moving, tall, with soft dark  hair  and  a
gloomy  but  all  the  more seductive cast of demeanor. Exceptional virility
often reflects in the subject's displayable features a sullen and  congested
something  that  pertains  to  what he has to conceal. And this was my case.
Well did I know, alas, that I could obtain at the snap  of  my  fingers  any
adult  female  I  chose; in fact, it had become quite a habit with me of not
being too attentive to women lest they come  toppling,  bloodripe,  into  my
cold lap. Had I been a franгais moyen with a taste for flashy ladies,
I  might  have  easily  found, among the many crazed beauties that lashed my
grim rock, creatures far more fascinating than Valeria. My choice,  however,
was  prompted by considerations whose essence was, as I realized too late, a
piteous compromise. All of which goes to show  how  dreadfully  stupid  poor
Humbert always was in matters of sex.


Although  I told myself I was looking merely for a soothing presence, a
glorified pot-au-feu, an animated merkin, what really attracted me to
Valeria was the imitation she gave of a little girl. She gave it not because
she had divined something about me; it was just her style--and  I  fell  for
it. Actually, she was at least in her late twenties (I never established her
exact  age  for  even her passport lied) and had mislaid her virginity under
circumstances that changed with her reminiscent moods. I, on my part, was as
naive as only a pervert can be. She looked fluffy  and  frolicsome,  dressed
a  la  gamine,  showed  a  generous amount of smooth leg, knew how to
stress the white of a bare instep by the black  of  a  velvet  slipper,  and
pouted,  and  dimpled,  and  romped, and dirndled, and shook her short curly
blond hair in the cutest and tritest fashion imaginable.
     After a brief ceremony at the mairie, I  tool  her  to  the  new
apartment I had rented and, somewhat to her surprise, had her wear, before I
touched  her, a girl's plain nightshirt that I had managed to filch from the
linen closet of an orphanage. I derived some fun from that nuptial night and
had the idiot in hysterics by sunrise. But reality soon asserted itself. The
bleached curl revealed its melanic root; the down turned to  prickles  on  a
shaved  shin;  the mobile moist mouth, no matter how I stuffed it with love,
disclosed ignominiously its resemblance  to  the  corresponding  part  in  a
treasured  portrait  of  her toadlike dead mama; and presently, instead of a
pale little gutter girl, Humbert Humbert had on his hands  a  large,  puffy,
short-legged, big-breasted and practically brainless baba.
     This  state  of  affairs lasted from 1935 to 1939. Her only asset was a
muted nature which did help to produce an odd sense of comfort in our  small
squalid  flat:  two  rooms,  a  hazy view in one window, a brick wall in the
other, a tiny kitchen, a shoe-shaped bath tub,  within  which  I  felt  like
Marat  but  with  no white-necked maiden to stab me. We had quite a few cozy
evenings together, she deep in her Paris-Soir, I working at a rickety
table. We went to movies, bicycle races and boxing matches.  I  appealed  to
her stale flesh very seldom, only in cases of great urgency and despair. The
grocer  opposite  had  a little daughter whose shadow drove me mad; but with
Valeria's help I did find after all  some  legal  outlets  to  my  fantastic
predicament.  As  to cooking, we tacitly dismissed the pot-au-feu and
had most of our meals at a crowded place in rue Bonaparte where  there  were
wine  stains  on the table cloth and a good deal of foreign babble. And next
door,  an  art  dealer  displayed  in  his  cluttered  window  a   splendid,
flamboyant,  green,  red,  golden and inky blue, ancient American estampe--a
locomotive with a gigantic smokestack, great baroque lamps and a  tremendous
cowcatcher,  hauling  its mauve coaches through the stormy prairie night and
mixing a lot of spark-studded black smoke with the furry thunder clouds.
     These burst. In the summer of 1939  mon  oncle  d'Amиrique  died
bequeathing  me  an  annual  income of a few thousand dollars on condition I
came to live in the States and showed some interest in  his  business.  This
prospect was most welcome to me. I felt my life needed a shake-up. There was
another  thing,  too:  moth  holes  had appeared in the plush of matrimonial
comfort. During the last weeks I had kept noticing that my fat  Valeria  was
not her usual self; had acquired a queer restlessness; even showed something
like  irritation  at  times,  which  was quite out of keeping with the stock
character she was supposed to impersonate.  When  I  informed  her  we  were
shortly  to  sail  for New York, she looked distressed and bewildered. There
were some tedious difficulties with her papers. She had a Nansen, or  better
say  Nonsense, passport which for some reason a share in her husband's solid
Swiss citizenship could not easily transcend;  and  I  decided  it  was  the
necessity  of  queuing in the prиfecture, and other formalities, that
had made her so listless, despite my patiently describing  to  her  America,
the  country  of  rosy children and great trees, where life would be such an
improvement on dull dingy Paris.
     We were coming out of some office building one morning, with her papers
almost in order, when Valeria, as she waddled by my side, began to shake her
poodle head vigorously without saying a word. I let her go on  for  a  while
and  then  asked  if  she  thought she had something inside. She answered (I
translate from her French which was, I imagine, a translation in its turn of
some Slavic platitude): "There is another man in my life."
     Now, these are ugly words for a husband  to  hear.  They  dazed  me,  I
confess.  To  beat  her  up  in  the  street,  there  and then, as an honest
vulgarian might have done, was not feasible. Years of secret sufferings  had
taught  me  superhuman  self-control. So I ushered her into a taxi which had
been invitingly  creeping  along  the  curb  for  some  time,  and  in  this
comparative  privacy  I  quietly  suggested  she  comment  her  wild talk. A
mounting fury was suffocating me--not because I had any particular  fondness
for that figure of fun, Mme Humbert, but because matters of legal and
illegal  conjunction were for me alone to decide, and here she was, Valeria,
the comedy wife, brazenly preparing to dispose in her own way of my  comfort
and  fate. I demanded her lover's name. I repeated my question; but she kept
up a burlesque babble, discoursing on her unhappiness with me and announcing
plans for an immediate divorce. "Mais qui est-ce?" I shouted at last,
striking her on the knee with my fist; and she, without even wincing, stared
at me as if the answer were too simple for words, then gave  a  quick  shrug
and  pointed  at  the thick neck of the taxi driver. He pulled up at a small
cafи and introduced himself. I do not remember his ridiculous name but after
all those years I still  see  him  quite  clearly--a  stocky  White  Russian
ex-colonel  with  a  bushy  mustache and a crew cut; there were thousands of
them plying that fool's trade in Paris. We sat down at a table; the  Tsarist
ordered  wine, and Valeria, after applying a wet napkin to her knee, went on
talking--into me rather than  to  me;  she  poured  words  into  this
dignified receptacle with a volubility I had never suspected she had in her.
And  every  now  and  then  she would volley a burst of Slavic at her stolid
lover. The situation was preposterous and  became  even  more  so  when  the
taxi-colonel,  stopping  Valeria  with  a  possessive smile, began to unfold
his views and plans. With an atrocious accent to his careful  French,
he  delineated  the  world  of love and work into which he proposed to enter
hand in hand with his child-wife Valeria. She by now was  preening  herself,
between  him  and  me, rouging her pursed lips, tripling her chin to pick at
her blouse-bosom and so forth, and he spoke of her as if  she  were  absent,
and  also  as if she were a kind of little ward that was in the act of being
transferred, for her own good, from one wise guardian to another even  wiser
one;  and  although  my  helpless  wrath may have exaggerated and disfigured
certain impressions, I can swear that  he  actually  consulted  me  on  such
things  as her diet, her periods, her wardrobe and the books she had read or
should read. "I think," - he said, "She will like  Jean  Christophe?"
Oh, he was quite a scholar, Mr. Taxovich.
     I  put  an  end to this gibberish by suggesting Valeria pack up her few
belongings immediately,  upon  which  the  platitudinous  colonel  gallantly
offered  to carry them into the car. Reverting to his professional state, he
drove the Humberts to their residence and all the way  Valeria  talked,  and
Humbert  the  Terrible  deliberated  with  Humbert the Small whether Humbert
Humbert should kill her or her lover, or both, or neither. I  remember  once
handling an automatic belonging to a fellow student, in the days (I have not
spoken  of  them,  I  think,  but  never mind) when I toyed with the idea of
enjoying his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow,
and then shooting myself. I now wondered if Valechka (as the colonel  called
her)  was  really  worth  shooting, or strangling, or drowning. She had very
vulnerable legs, and I decided I would limit  myself  to  hurting  her  very
horribly as soon as we were alone.
     But  we  never were. Valechka--by now shedding torrents of tears tinged
with the mess of her rainbow make-up,--started to fill anyhow a  trunk,  and
two  suitcases, and a bursting carton, and visions of putting on my mountain
boots and taking a running kick at her rump were of course impossible to put
into execution with the cursed colonel  hovering  around  all  the  time.  I
cannot  say he behaved insolently or anything like that; on the contrary, he
displayed, as a small sideshow in the theatricals I had been inveigled in, a
discreet old-world civility, punctuating his movements  with  all  sorts  of
mispronounced  apologies (j'ai demande pardonne--excuse me--est-ce
que j'ai puis--may I--and so forth), and  turning  away  tactfully  when
Valechka  took  down  with  a flourish her pink panties from the clothesline
above the tub; but he seemed to  be  all  over  the  place  at  once,  le
gredin,  agreeing  his frame with the anatomy of the flat, reading in my
chair my newspaper, untying a knotted string, rolling a cigarette,  counting
the  teaspoons,  visiting  the  bathroom,  helping  his  moll to wrap up the
electric fan her father had given her, and carrying streetward her  luggage.
I  sat  with  arms  folded,  one  hip  on the window sill, dying of hate and
boredom. At last both were out of the quivering apartment--the vibration  of
the  door  I  had  slammed  after  them still rang in my every nerve, a poor
substitute for the backhand slap with which I ought to have hit  her  across
the  cheekbone  according  to  the  rules of the movies. Clumsily playing my
part, I stomped to the bathroom to check if they had taken my English toilet
water; they had not; but I noticed with a spasm of fierce disgust  that  the
former  Counselor  of the Tsar, after thoroughly easing his bladder, had not
flushed the toilet. That solemn pool of alien  urine  with  a  soggy,  tawny
cigarette  butt  disintegrating  in it struck me as a crowning insult, and I
wildly looked around for a weapon. Actually I daresay  it  was  nothing  but
middle-class  Russian  courtesy  (with  an  oriental tang, perhaps) that had
prompted the good colonel (Maximovich! his name suddenly taxies back to me),
a very formal person as they all are, to muffle his private need in decorous
silence so as not to underscore the small size of his host's  domicile  with
the  rush  of a gross cascade on top of his own hushed trickle. But this did
not enter my mind at the moment, as  groaning  with  rage  I  ransacked  the
kitchen  for  something  better  than  a broom. Then, canceling my search, I
dashed  out  of  the  house  with  the  heroic  decision  of  attacking  him
barefisted;  despite my natural vigor, I am no pugilist, while the short but
broad-shouldered Maximovich seemed made of pig iron. The void of the street,
revealing nothing of my wife's departure except a rhinestone button that she
had dropped in the mud after preserving it for three unnecessary years in  a
broken box, may have spared me a bloody nose. But no matter. I had my little
revenge  in  due  time.  A  man  from  Pasadena  told  me  one day that Mrs.
Maximovich nиe Zborovski had died in childbirth around 1945; the couple  had
somehow  got  over  to  California and had been used there, for an excellent
salary, in a year-long experiment  conducted  by  a  distinguished  American
ethnologist.  The experiment dealt with human and racial reactions to a diet
of bananas and dates in a constant position on all fours.  My  informant,  a
doctor,  swore he had seen with his own eyes obese Valechka and her colonel,
by then gray-haired and also quite corpulent, diligently crawling about  the
well-swept  floors  of  a  brightly lit set of rooms (fruit in one, water in
another, mats in a third and so on) in the company of  several  other  hired
quadrupeds,  selected from indigent and helpless groups. I tried to find the
results of these tests in the Review of Anthropology; but they appear
not to have been published yet. These scientific  products  take  of  course
some  time  to  fructuate.  I hope they will be illustrated with photographs
when they do get printed, although it is  not  very  likely  that  a  prison
library  will  harbor  such  erudite works. The one to which I am restricted
these days, despite my lawyer's favors, is  a  good  example  of  the  inane
eclecticism  governing the selection of books in prison libraries. They have
the Bible, of course, and Dickens (an ancient set,  N.Y.,  G.W.  Dillingham,
Publisher,  MDCCCLXXXVII); and the Children's Encyclopedia (with some
nice photographs of sunshine-haired Girl Scouts in shorts), and A  Murder
Is  Announced  by  Agatha  Christie; but they also have such coruscating
trifles as A vagabond  in  Italy  by  Percy  Elphinstone,  author  of
Venice  Revisited,  Boston,  1868,  and a comparatively recent (1946)
Who's Who in the Limelight--actors, producers, playwrights, and shots
of static scenes. In looking through the latter volume, I was  treated  last
night  to one of those dazzling coincidences that logicians loathe and poets
love. I transcribe most of the page:

     Pym, Roland. Born in Lundy, Mass., 1922.  Received  stage  training  at
Elsinore  Playhouse,  Derby,  N.Y.  Made debut in Sunburst. Among his
many appearances are Two Blocks from Here, The Girl in  Green,  Scrambled
Husbands, The Strange Mushroom, Touch and Go, John Lovely, I Was Dreaming of
You.
     Quilty,  Clare,  American  dramatist.  Born  in Ocean City, N.J., 1911.
Educated at Columbia University. Started on a commercial career  but  turned
to   playwriting.  Author  of  The  Little  Nymph,  The  Lady  Who  Loved
Lightning (in collaboration with Vivian  Darkbloom),  Dark  Age,  The
strange Mushroom, Fatherly Love, and others. His many plays for children
are notable. Little Nymph (1940) traveled 14,000 miles and played 280
performances  on  the  road  during  the  winter  before ending in New York.
Hobbies: fast cars, photography, pets.
     Quine, Dolores. Born in 1882, in Dayton, Ohio.  Studied  for  stage  at
American  Academy.  First  played  in Ottawa in 1900. Made New York debut in
1904 in Never Talk to Strangers. Has disappeared since in [a list  of
some thirty plays follows].

     How  the look of my dear love's name even affixed to some old hag of an
actress, still makes me rock with helpless pain!  Perhaps,  she  might  have
been an actress too. Born 1935. Appeared (I notice the slip of my pen in the
preceding  paragraph,  but  please  do  not  correct it, Clarence) in The
Murdered Playwright. Quine the Swine. Guilty of killing Quilty.  Oh,  my
Lolita, I have only words to play with!

Divorce  proceedings  delayed  my  voyage, and the gloom of yet another
World War had settled upon the globe when,  after  a  winter  of  ennui  and
pneumonia  in  Portugal, I at last reached the States. In New York I eagerly
accepted the soft job fate offered me: it consisted mainly  of  thinking  up
and   editing   perfume   ads.   I  welcomed  its  desultory  character  and
pseudoliterary aspects, attending to it whenever I had nothing better to do.
On the other hand, I was urged by a  war-time  university  in  New  York  to
complete  my  comparative  history of French literature for English-speaking
students. The first volume took me a couple of years during which I  put  in
seldom  less than fifteen hours of work daily. As I look back on those days,
I see them divided tidily into ample  light  and  narrow  shade:  the  light
pertaining  to the solace of research in palatial libraries, the shade to my
excruciating desires and insomnias of which enough has been said. Knowing me
by now, the reader can easily imagine how dusty and hot  I  got,  trying  to
catch  a  glimpse of nymphets (alas, always remote) playing in Central Park,
and how repulsed I was by the glitter of deodorized career girls that a  gay
dog  in  one  of the offices kept unloading upon me. Let us skip all that. A
dreadful breakdown sent me to a sanatorium for more than a year; I went back
to my work--only to be hospitalized again.
     Robust outdoor life seemed  to  promise  me  some  relief.  One  of  my
favorite  doctors,  a charming cynical chap with a little brown beard, had a
brother, and this brother was  about  to  lead  an  expedition  into  arctic
Canada.  I was attached to it as a "recorder of psychic reactions." With two
young botanists and an old carpenter I  shared  now  and  then  (never  very
successfully)   the  favors  of  one  of  our  nutritionists,  a  Dr.  Anita
Johnson--who was soon flown back, I am glad to say. I had little  notion  of
what   object  the  expedition  was  pursuing.  Judging  by  the  number  of
meteorologists upon it, we may have been tracking to its lair (somewhere  on
Prince  of  Wales'  Island,  I  understand)  the  wandering and wobbly north
magnetic pole. One group, jointly with the Canadians, established a  weather
station on Pierre Point in Melville Sound. Another group, equally misguided,
collected plankton. A third studied tuberculosis in the tundra. Bert, a film
photographer--an insecure fellow with whom at one time I was made to partake
in   a   good   deal   of   menial   work   (he,   too,   had  some  psychic
troubles)--maintained that the big men on our  team,  the  real  leaders  we
never  saw,  were  mainly  engaged  in  checking  the  influence of climatic
amelioration on the coats of the arctic fox.
     We lived in prefabricated timber cabins amid a  Pre-Cambrian  world  of
granite.  We had heaps of supplies--the Reader's Digest, an ice cream
mixer, chemical toilets,  paper  caps  for  Christmas.  My  health  improved
wonderfully  in spite or because of all the fantastic blankness and boredom.
Surrounded  by  such  dejected  vegetation  as  willow  scrub  and  lichens;
permeated, and, I suppose, cleansed by a whistling gale; seated on a boulder
under  a  completely  translucent  sky  (through  which, however, nothing of
importance showed), I felt curiously aloof from my own self. No  temptations
maddened  me.  The  plump, glossy little Eskimo girls with their fish smell,
hideous raven hair and guinea pig faces, evoked even less desire in me  than
Dr. Johnson had. Nymphets do not occur in polar regions.
     I  left  my betters the task of analyzing glacial drifts, drumlins, and
gremlins, and kremlins, and for a time tried  to  jot  down  what  I  fondly
thought  were  "reactions"  (I  noticed, for instance, that dreams under the
midnight  sun  tended  to  be  highly  colored,  and  this  my  friend   the
photographer  confirmed).  I was also supposed to quiz my various companions
on a number of  important  matters,  such  as  nostalgia,  fear  of  unknown
animals,  food-fantasies,  nocturnal  emissions,  hobbies,  choice  of radio
programs, changes in outlook and so forth. Everybody got so fed up with this
that I soon dropped the project completely, and only toward the  end  of  my
twenty  months  of  cold  labor  (as  one  of the botanists jocosely put it)
concocted a perfectly spurious and very racy report  that  the  reader  will
find  published in he Annals of Adult Psychophysics for 1945 or 1946,
as well as in the  issue  of  Arctic  Explorations  devoted  to  that
particular  expedition;  which, in conclusion, was not really concerned with
Victoria Island copper or anything like that, as I  learned  later  from  my
genial  doctor;  for  the  nature  of  its  real  purpose was what is termed
"hush-hush," and so let me add merely that whatever it was, that purpose was
admirably achieved.
     The  reader  will  regret  to  learn  that  soon  after  my  return  to
civilization I had another bout with insanity (if to melancholia and a sense
of  insufferable  oppression  that  cruel  term  must  be applied). I owe my
complete restoration to a discovery I  made  while  being  treated  at  that
particular  very  expensive  sanatorium.  I  discovered there was an endless
source of robust enjoyment in trifling with psychiatrists: cunningly leading
them on; never letting them see that you know all the tricks of  the  trade;
inventing  for  them  elaborate  dreams,  pure classics in style (which make
them, the dream-extortionists, dream and wake up shrieking);  teasing
them  with  fake  "primal  scenes";  and  never  allowing them the slightest
glimpse of one's real sexual predicament. By bribing a nurse I won access to
some  files  and  discovered,  with  glee,  cards  calling  me  "potentially
homosexual"  and  "totally  impotent."  The  sport  was  so  excellent,  its
results--in my case--so ruddy that I stayed  on  for  a  whole  month
after  I  was  quite well (sleeping admirably and eating like a schoolgirl).
And then I added another week just for the pleasure of taking on a  powerful
newcomer, a displaced (and, surely, deranged) celebrity, known for his knack
of making patients believe they had witnessed their own conception.

Upon  signing  out,  I  cast  around  for some place in the New England
countryside or sleepy small town (elms, white church) where I could spend  a
studious  summer  subsisting  on a compact boxful of notes I had accumulated
and bathing in some nearby lake. My work had begun to interest  me  again--I
mean  my scholarly exertions; the other thing, my active participation in my
uncle's posthumous perfumes, had by then been cut down to a minimum.
     One of his former employees,  the  scion  of  a  distinguished  family,
suggested I spend a few months in the residence of his impoverished cousins,
a  Mr.  McCoo,  retired,  and  his wife, who wanted to let their upper story
where a late aunt  had  delicately  dwelt.  He  said  they  had  two  little
daughters,  one  a baby, the other a girl of twelve, and a beautiful garden,
not far from a beautiful lake, and I said it sounded perfectly perfect.
     I  exchanged  letters  with  these  people,  satisfying  them   I   was
housebroken,  and  spent  a  fantastic  night on the train, imagining in all
possible detail the enigmatic nymphet I would coach in French and fondle  in
Humbertish.  Nobody  met  me at the toy station where I alighted with my new
expensive bag, and nobody answered the  telephone;  eventually,  however,  a
distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes  turned  up  at  the  only  hotel  of
green-and-pink Ramsdale with  the  news  that  his  house  had  just  burned
down--possibly,  owing to the synchronous conflagration that had been raging
all night in my veins. His family, he said, had fled to a farm he owned, and
had taken the car, but a friend of his wife's, a grand person, Mrs. Haze  of
342  Lawn  Street, offered to accommodate me. A lady who lived opposite Mrs.
Haze's  had  lent  McCoo  her  limousine,   a   marvelously   old-fashioned,
square-topped affair, manned by a cheerful Negro. Now, since the only reason
for  my  coming  at  all  had  vanished,  the  aforesaid  arrangement seemed
preposterous. All right, his house would have to be completely  rebuilt,  so
what?  Had  he  not  insured  it sufficiently? I was angry, disappointed and
bored, but being a polite European, could not refuse to be sent off to  Lawn
Street  in  that  funeral  car, feeling that otherwise McCoo would devise an
even more elaborate means of getting rid of me. I saw him scamper away,  and
my chauffeur shook his head with a soft chuckle. En route, I swore to myself
I  would  not  dream of staying in Ramsdale under any circumstance but would
fly  that  very  day  to  the  Bermudas  or  the  Bahamas  or  the   Blazes.
Possibilities of sweetness on technicolor beaches had been trickling through
my  spine  for  some  time  before, and McCoo's cousin had, in fact, sharply
diverted that train of thought with his well-meaning but  as  it  transpired
now absolutely inane suggestion.
     Speaking  of  sharp turns: we almost ran over a meddlesome suburban dog
(one of those who like in wait for cars) as we swerved into Lawn  Street.  A
little  further,  the  Haze  house,  a white-frame horror, appeared, looking
dingy and old, more gray than white--the kind of place you know will have  a
rubber  tube  affixable  to  the  tub faucet in lieu of shower. I tipped the
chauffeur and hoped he would immediately drive away so that I  might  double
back  unnoticed to my hotel and bag; but the man merely crossed to the other
side of the street where an old lady was calling to him from her porch. What
could I do? I pressed the bell button.
     A colored maid let me in--and left me standing on  the  mat  while  she
rushed  back  to  the  kitchen where something was burning that ought not to
burn.
     The front hall  was  graced  with  door  chimes,  a  white-eyed  wooden
thingamabob of commercial Mexican origin, and that banal darling of the arty
middle  class,  van Gogh's "Arlиsienne." A door ajar to the right afforded a
glimpse of a living room, with some more Mexican trash in a  corner  cabinet
and  a  striped sofa along the wall. There was a staircase at the end of the
hallway, and as I stood mopping my brow (only now did I realize how  hot  it
had  been  out-of-doors)  and staring, to stare at something, at an old gray
tennis ball that lay on an oak chest, there came from the upper landing  the
contralto  voice  of  Mrs.  Haze,  who  leaning  over the banisters inquired
melodiously, "Is that Monsieur Humbert?" A bit of cigarette ash dropped from
there in addition. Presently,  the  lady  herself--sandals,  maroon  slacks,
yellow  silk  blouse, squarish face, in that order--came down the steps, her
index finger still tapping upon her cigarette.
     I think I had better describe her right away, to get it over with.  The
poor  lady  was  in  her  middle thirties, she had a shiny forehead, plucked
eyebrows and quite simple but not unattractive features of a type  that  may
be  defined as a weak solution of Marlene Dietrich. Patting her bronze-brown
bun, she led me into the parlor and we talked for a minute about  the  McCoo
fire  and  the  privilege of living in Ramsdale. Her very wide-set sea-green
eyes had a funny way of traveling all over you, carefully avoiding your  own
eyes.  Her  smile  was  but  a  quizzical jerk of one eyebrow; and uncoiling
herself from the sofa as she talked, she kept  making  spasmodic  dashes  at
three  ashtrays  and the near fender (where lay the brown core of an apple);
whereupon she would sink back again, one leg  folded  under  her.  She  was,
obviously,  one  of those women whose polished words may reflect a book club
or bridge club, or any other deadly conventionality,  but  never  her  soul;
women who are completely devoid of humor; women utterly indifferent at heart
to  the  dozen  or  so  possible subjects of a parlor conversation, but very
particular  about  the  rules  of  such  conversations,  through  the  sunny
cellophane  of  which  not  very  appetizing  frustrations  can  be  readily
distinguished. I was perfectly aware that if by any wild chance I became her
lodger, she would methodically proceed to do in regard to me what  taking  a
lodger probably meant to her all along, and I would again be enmeshed in one
of those tedious affairs I knew so well.
     But there was no question of my settling there. I could not be happy in
that type  of  household with bedraggled magazines on every chair and a kind
of horrible hybridization between the comedy of so-called "functional modern
furniture" and the tragedy of decrepit rockers and rickety lamp tables  with
dead lamps. I was led upstairs, and to the left--into "my" room. I inspected
it  through  the  mist  of my utter rejection of it; but I did discern above
"my" bed Renи Prinet's "Kreutzer Sonata." And she called that servant maid's
room a "semi-studio"! Let's get out of here at once, I firmly said to myself
as I pretended to deliberate over the absurdly,  and  ominously,  low  price
that my wistful hostess was asking for board and bed.
     Old-world  politeness, however, obliged me to go on with the ordeal. We
crossed the landing to the right side of the house (where "I and Lo have our
rooms"--Lo being presumably the maid), and  the  lodger-lover  could  hardly
conceal  a shudder when he, a very fastidious male, was granted a preview of
the only bathroom, a tiny oblong between the landing and "Lo's"  room,  with
limp  wet  things  overhanging  the dubious tub (the question mark of a hair
inside); and there were the expected coils of  the  rubber  snake,  and  its
complement--a pinkish cozy, coyly covering the toilet lid.
     "I  see you are not too favorably impressed," said the lady letting her
hand rest for a moment upon my sleeve: she combined a cool  forwardness--the
overflow  of what I think is called "poise"--with a shyness and sadness that
caused her detached way of selecting her words to seem as unnatural  as  the
intonation  of  a  professor  of  "speech." "This is not a neat household, I
confess," the doomed ear continued, "but I assure  you  [she  looked  at  my
lips],  you  will be very comfortable, very comfortable, indeed. Let me show
you the garden" (the last more brightly, with a kind of winsome toss of  the
voice).
     Reluctantly  I  followed her downstairs again; then through the kitchen
at the end of the hall, on the right side of the house--the side where  also
the dining room and the parlor were (under "my" room, on the left, there was
nothing  but  a  garage).  In  the kitchen, the Negro maid, a plump youngish
woman, said, as she took her large glossy black purse from the knob  of  the
door  leading  to  the  back porch: "I'll go now, Mrs. Haze." "Yes, Louise,"
answered Mrs. Haze with a sigh. "I'll settle with you Friday." We passed  on
to a small pantry and entered the dining room, parallel to the parlor we had
already  admired.  I  noticed  a white sock on the floor. With a deprecatory
grunt, Mrs. Haze stooped without stopping and threw it into a closet next to
the pantry. We cursorily inspected a mahogany table with a fruit vase in the
middle, containing nothing but the still glistening stone  of  one  plum.  I
groped  for  the  timetable I had in my pocket and surreptitiously fished it
out to look as soon as possible for a train. I was still walking behind Mrs.
Haze though the dining room when, beyond it, there came a  sudden  burst  of
greenery--"the  piazza,"  sang  out  my  leader, and then, without the least
warning, a blue sea-wave swelled under my heart and, from a mat in a pool of
sun, half-naked, kneeling, turning about on her knees, there was my  Riviera
love peering at me over dark glasses.
     It  was  the same child--the same frail, honey-hued shoulders, the same
silky supple bare back, the same chestnut head of hair. A polka-dotted black
kerchief tied around her chest hid from my aging ape eyes, but not from  the
gaze  of  young memory, the juvenile breasts I had fondled one immortal day.
And, as if I were the  fairy-tale  nurse  of  some  little  princess  (lost,
kidnapped, discovered in gypsy rags through which her nakedness smiled at the
king  and  his  hounds),  I recognized the tiny dark-brown mole on her side.
With awe and delight (the king crying for joy,  the  trumpets  blaring,  the
nurse  drunk)  I  saw  again  her lovely indrawn abdomen where my southbound
mouth had briefly paused; and those puerile hips on which I had  kissed  the
crenulated  imprint  left  by the band of her shorts--that last mad immortal
day behind the "Roches Roses." The twenty-five years I had lived since then,
tapered to a palpitating point, and vanished.
     I find it most difficult to express with  adequate  force  that  flash,
that  shiver,  that  impact  of passionate recognition. In the course of the
sun-shot moment that my glance slithered over the kneeling child  (her  eyes
blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to
cure me of all my aches) while I passed by her in my adult disguise (a great
big  handsome  hunk  of movieland manhood), the vacuum of my soul managed to
suck in every detail of her bright beauty, and these I checked  against  the
features  of  my  dead  bride.  A  little  later,  of  course,  she, this
nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita, was to eclipse  completely  her
prototype.  All  I  want  to  stress is that my discovery of her was a fatal
consequence of that "princedom by the sea" in my tortured  past.  Everything
between  the two events was but a series of gropings and blunders, and false
rudiments of joy. Everything they shared made one of them.
     I have no illusions, however. My judges will regard all this as a piece
of mummery on the part of a madman with a  gross  liking  for  the  fruit
vert.  Au  fond,  гa m'est bien иgal. All I know is that while the
Haze woman and I went down the steps into the breathless  garden,  my  knees
were  like  reflections  of  knees  in rippling water, and my lips were like
sand, and--
     "That was my Lo," she said, "and these are my lilies."
     "Yes," I said, "yes. They are beautiful, beautiful, beautiful."

Exhibit number two is a pocket diary bound in black imitation  leather,
with a golden year, 1947, en escalier, in its upper left-hand corner.
I  speak of this neat product of the Blank Blank Co., Blankton, Mass., as if
it were really before me. Actually, it was destroyed five years go and  what
we  examine  now  (by  courtesy  of  a photographic memory) is but its brief
materialization, a puny unfledged phoenix.
     I remember the thing so exactly because I wrote it really twice.  First
I  jotted  down each entry in pencil (with many erasures and corrections) on
the leaves of what is commercially known as a "typewriter tablet";  then,  I
copied  it out with obvious abbreviations in my smallest, most satanic, hand
in the little black book just mentioned.
     May 30 is a Fast Day by Proclamation in New Hampshire but  not  in  the
Carolinas. That day an epidemic of "abdominal flu" (whatever that is) forced
Ramsdale  to  close  its  schools  for  the summer. The reader may check the
weather data in the Ramsdale Journal for 1947. A few days before that
I moved into the Haze house, and the little diary which  I  now  propose  to
reel  off  (much  as  a  spy  delivers  by heart the contents of the note he
swallowed) covers most of June.
     Thursday. Very warm day. From a vantage point (bathroom  window)
saw  Dolores taking things off a clothesline in the apple-green light behind
the house. Strolled out. She wore a plaid shirt, blue  jeans  and  sneakers.
Every  movement  she  made in the dappled sun plucked at the most secret and
sensitive chord of my abject body. After a while she sat down next to me  on
the  lower  step  of the back porch and began to pick up the pebbles between
her feet--pebbles, my God, then a curled bit of milk-bottle glass resembling
a snarling lip--and chuck them at a can. Ping.  You  can't  a  second
time--you  can't  hit  it--oh,  marvelous:  tender and tanned, not the least
blemish. Sundaes cause acne. The excess of the oily substance  called  sebum
which nourishes the hair follicles of the skin creates, when too profuse, an
irritation  that  opens  the way to infection. But nymphets do not have acne
although they gorge themselves on rich food. God,  what  agony,  that  silky
shimmer above her temple grading into bright brown hair. And the little bone
twitching  at  the  side  of her dust-powdered ankle. "The McCoo girl? Ginny
McCoo? Oh, she's a fright. And mean. And lame. Nearly died of polio."  Ping.
The  glistening  tracery  of down on her forearm. When she got up to take in
the wash, I had a chance  of  adoring  from  afar  the  faded  seat  of  her
rolled-up  jeans.  Out  of  the lawn, bland Mrs. Haze, complete with camera,
grew up like a fakir's fake tree and  after  some  heliotropic  fussing--sad
eyes  up,  glad  eyes  down--had  the  cheek  of  taking my picture as I sat
blinking on the steps, Humbert le Bel.
     Friday. Saw her going somewhere with a dark  girl  called  Rose.
Why  does  the way she walks--a child, mind you, a mere child!--excite me so
abominably? Analyze it. A faint suggestion of turned  in  toes.  A  kind  of
wiggly  looseness  below the knee prolonged to the end of each footfall. The
ghost of a drag. Very infantile, infinitely meretricious. Humbert Humbert is
also infinitely moved by the little one's slangy speech, by her  harsh  high
voice.  Later  heard  her  volley  crude  nonsense at Rose across the fence.
Twanging through me in a rising rhythm. Pause. "I must go now, kiddo."
     Saturday. (Beginning perhaps amended.) I know it is  madness  to
keep  this  journal  but  it  gives me a strange thrill to do so; and only a
loving wife could decipher my microscopic script. Let me state  with  a  sob
that  today  my L. was sun-bathing on the so-called "piazza," but her mother
and some other woman were around all the time. Of course, I might  have  sat
there  in the rocker and pretended to read. Playing safe, I kept away, for I
was afraid that the horrible, insane, ridiculous  and  pitiful  tremor  that
palsied  me might prevent me from making my entrиe with any semblance
of casualness.
     Sunday. Heat ripple still with us; a most  favonian  week.  This
time  I  took up a strategic position, with obese newspaper and new pipe, in
the piazza rocker before L. arrived. To my intense disappointment she
came with her mother, both in two-piece bathing suits, black, as new  as  my
pipe.  My  darling,  my  sweetheart  stood  for a moment near me--wanted the
funnies--and she smelt almost exactly like the other one, the  Riviera  one,
but  more  intensely  so, with rougher overtones--a torrid odor that at once
set my manhood astir--but she had already  yanked  out  of  me  the  coveted
section and retreated to her mat near her phocine mamma. There my beauty lay
down  on  her stomach, showing me, showing the thousand eyes wide open in my
eyed blood, her slightly raised shoulder blades, and  the  bloom  along  the
incurvation  of  her  spine,  and  the  swellings  of her tense narrow nates
clothed in black, and the seaside of her schoolgirl  thighs.  Silently,  the
seventh-grader  enjoyed  her  green-red-blue  comics.  She was the loveliest
nymphet green-red-blue Priap himself could think up. As I looked on, through
prismatic layers of light, dry-lipped, focusing my lust and rocking slightly
under  my  newspaper,  I  felt  that  my  perception  of  her,  if  properly
concentrated  upon,  might  be sufficient to have me attain a beggar's bliss
immediately; but, like some  predator  that  prefers  a  moving  prey  to  a
motionless  one, I planned to have this pitiful attainment coincide with the
various girlish movements she made now and then as she read, such as  trying
to  scratch  the middle of her back and revealing a stippled armpit--but fat
Haze suddenly spoiled everything by turning to me and asking me for a light,
and starting a make-believe conversation about a fake book by  some  popular
fraud.
     Monday.  Delectatio morosa. I spend my doleful days in dumps and
dolors. We (mother Haze, Dolores and I) were to go to Our  Glass  Lake  this
afternoon, and bathe, and bask; but a nacreous morn degenerated at noon into
rain, and Lo made a scene.
     The  median  age  of pubescence for girls has been found to be thirteen
years and  nine  months  in  New  York  and  Chicago.  The  age  varies  for
individuals  from  ten,  or  earlier,  to  seventeen. Virginia was not quite
fourteen when Harry Edgar possessed her. He gave  her  lessons  in  algebra.
Je  m'imagine  cela.  They  spent their honeymoon at Petersburg, Fla.
"Monsieur Poe-poe," as that boy in one of Monsieur Humbert Humbert's classes
in Paris called the poet-poet.
     I have all the characteristics which, according to writers on  the  sex
interests  of  children,  start  the  responses  stirring  in a little girl:
clean-cut jaw, muscular hand, deep sonorous voice, broad shoulder. Moreover,
I am said to resemble some crooner or actor chap on whom Lo has a crush.
     Tuesday. Rain. Lake of the Rains.  Mamma  out  shopping.  L.,  I
knew,  was  somewhere  quite near. In result of some stealthy maneuvering, I
came across her in her mother's bedroom. Prying her left eye open to get rid
of a speck of something. Checked frock. Although I do love that intoxicating
brown fragrance of hers, I really think she should wash her hair once  in  a
while.  For a moment, we were both in the same warm green bath of the mirror
that reflected the top of a poplar with us in the sky. Held her  roughly  by
the  shoulders,  then  tenderly  by the temples, and turned her about. "It's
right there," she said. "I can feel it." "Swiss peasant would use the top of
her tongue." "Lick it out?" "Yeth. Shly try?" "Sure,"  she  said.  Gently  I
pressed  my  quivering sting along her rolling salty eyeball. "Goody-goody,"
she said nictating. "It is gone." "Now the other?"  "You  dope,"  she
began,  "there  is noth--" but here she noticed the pucker of my approaching
lips. "Okay," she said cooperatively, and bending toward her  warm  upturned
russet  face  somber Humbert pressed his mouth to her fluttering eyelid. She
laughed, and brushed past me out of the room. My heart seemed everywhere  at
once.   Never   in   my  life--not  even  when  fondling  my  child-love  in
France--never--
     Night. Never have I experienced such agony. I would  like  to  describe
her  face,  her  ways--and I cannot, because my own desire for her blinds me
when she is near. I am not used to being with nymphets, damn it. If I  close
my eyes I see but an immobilized fraction of her, a cinematographic still, a
sudden  smooth nether loveliness, as with one knee up under her tartan skirt
she sits tying her shoe. "Dolores Haze, ne montrez pas  vos  zhambes"
(this is her mother who thinks she knows French).
     A  poet  ю  mes  heures, I composed a madrigal to the soot-black
lashes of her pale-gray vacant eyes, to the five  asymmetrical  freckles  on
her  bobbed nose, to the blond down of her brown limbs; but I tore it up and
cannot recall it today. Only in the tritest of terms (diary resumed)  can  I
describe  Lo's features: I might say her hair is auburn, and her lips as red
as licked red candy, the lower one prettily plump--oh, that I  were  a  lady
writer  who  could  have  her  pose naked in a naked light! But instead I am
lanky, big-boned, wooly-chested Humbert Humbert, with thick  black  eyebrows
and  a  queer  accent, and a cesspoolful of rotting monsters behind his slow
boyish smile. And neither is she the fragile child of a feminine novel. What
drives me insane is the twofold nature of this  nymphet--of  every  nymphet,
perhaps;  this mixture in my Lolita of tender dreamy childishness and a kind
of eerie vulgarity,  stemming  from  the  snub-nosed  cuteness  of  ads  and
magazine  pictures,  from  the blurry pinkness of adolescent maidservants in
the Old Country (smelling of crushed daisies and sweat); and from very young
harlots disguised as children in provincial brothels; and  then  again,  all
this  gets  mixed up with the exquisite stainless tenderness seeping through
the musk and the mud, through the dirt and the death, oh God,  oh  God.  And
what is most singular is that she, this Lolita, my Lolita, has
individualized  the writer's ancient lust, so that above and over everything
there is--Lolita.
     Wednesday. "Look, make Mother take you and me to Our Glass  Lake
tomorrow."  These  were  the  textual words said to me by my twelve-year-old
flame in a voluptuous whisper, as we happened to bump into  one  another  on
the  front  porch,  I  out,  she  in. The reflection of the afternoon sun, a
dazzling white diamond with innumerable iridescent spikes  quivered  on  the
round  back  of  a  parked  car.  The leafage of a voluminous elm played its
mellow shadows upon the clapboard wall of the house.  Two  poplars  shivered
and shook. You could make out the formless sounds of remote traffic; a child
calling  "Nancy,  Nan-cy!"  In  the  house,  Lolita  had put on her favorite
"Little Carmen" record which I used to call "Dwarf Conductors,"  making  her
snort with mock derision at my mock wit.
     Thursday.  Last  night  we  sat  on  the piazza, the Haze woman,
Lolita and I. Warm dusk had deepened into amorous darkness. The old girl had
finished relating in great detail the plot of a movie she and  L.  had  seen
sometime  in  the winter. The boxer had fallen extremely low when he met the
good old priest (who had been a boxer himself in his robust youth and  could
still  slug  a  sinner).  We sat on cushions heaped on the floor, and L. was
between the woman and me (she had squeezed herself in, the pet). In my turn,
I launched upon a hilarious account of my arctic  adventures.  The  muse  of
invention  handed  me a rifle and I shot a white bear who sat down and said:
Ah! All the while I was acutely aware of L.'s nearness  and  as  I  spoke  I
gestured in the merciful dark and took advantage of those invisible gestures
of  mine  to  touch her hand, her shoulder and a ballerina of wool and gauze
which she played with and kept sticking into my lap; and finally, when I had
completely enmeshed my glowing darling in this weave of ethereal caresses, I
dared stroke her bare leg along the gooseberry  fuzz  of  her  shin,  and  I
chuckled  at  my own jokes, and trembled, and concealed my tremors, and once
or twice felt with my rapid lips the warmth of her hair as I treated her  to
a  quick  nuzzling,  humorous  aside  and  caressed her plaything. She, too,
fidgeted a good deal so that finally her mother told her sharply to quit  it
and  sent  the doll flying into the dark, and I laughed and addressed myself
to Haze across Lo's legs to let my hand creep up my nymphet's thin back  and
feel her skin through her boy's shirt.
     But  I  knew  it  was  all  hopeless, and was sick with longing, and my
clothes felt miserably tight, and I was almost glad when her mother's  quiet
voice  announced  in  the  dark:  "And now we all think that Lo should go to
bed." "I think you stink," said Lo. "Which means there  will  be  no  picnic
tomorrow,"  said Haze. "This is a free country," said Lo. When angry Lo with
a Bronx cheer had gone, I stayed on from sheer inertia,  while  Haze  smoked
her tenth cigarette of the evening and complained of Lo.
     She  had been spiteful, if you please, at the age of one, when she used
to throw her toys out of her crib  so  that  her  poor  mother  should  keep
picking  them  up,  the villainous infant! Now, at twelve, she was a regular
pest, said Haze. All she wanted from life was to be one day a strutting  and
prancing  baton  twirler  or  a jitterbug. Her grades were poor, but she was
better adjusted in her new school than in Pisky (Pisky  was  the  Haze  home
town  in  the  Middle West. The Ramsdale house was her late mother-in-law's.
They had moved to Ramsdale less than two years ago). "Why  was  she  unhappy
there?"  "Oh,"  said  Haze,  "poor  me should know, I went through that when
I was a kid: boys twisting one's arm, banging into one with loads  of
books,  pulling  one's hair, hurting one's breasts, flipping one's skirt. Of
course, moodiness is a common concomitant of growing up, but Lo exaggerates.
Sullen and evasive. Rude and defiant. Struck Viola, an  Italian  schoolmate,
in  the  seat with a fountain pen. Know what I would like? If you, monsieur,
happened to be still here in the fall, I'd ask you  to  help  her  with  her
homework--you seem to know everything, geography, mathematics, French." "Oh,
everything,"  answered  monsieur.  "That  means," said Haze quickly, "you'll
be here!" I wanted to shout that I would stay on eternally if only  I
could  hope  to  caress  now  and then my incipient pupil. But I was wary of
Haze. So I just grunted and stretched my limbs nonconcomitantly  (le  mot
juste)  and  presently  went  up  to  my  room.  The woman, however, was
evidently not prepared to call it a day. I was already lying  upon  my  cold
bed  both  hands pressing to my face Lolita's fragrant ghost when I heard my
indefatigable landlady creeping stealthily up to my door to whisper  through
it--just  to  make  sure,  she  said, I was through with the Glance and Gulp
magazine I had borrowed the other day. From her room  Lo  yelled  she
had it. We are quite a lending library in this house, thunder of God.
     Friday. I wonder what my academic publishers would say if I were
to quote  in  my  textbook  Ronsard's "la vermeillette fente" or Remy
Belleau's "un petit mont feutrи de mousse dиlicate, tracи sur  le  milieu
d'un  fillet  escarlatte"  and  so  forth. I shall probably have another
breakdown if I stay any longer in this  house,  under  the  strain  of  this
intolerable  temptation,  by the side of my darling--my darling--my life and
my bride. Has she already been initiated by mother nature to the Mystery  of
the  Menarche?  Bloated  feelings.  The Curse of the Irish. Falling from the
roof. Grandma is visiting. "Mr. Uterus [I  quote  from  a  girls'  magazine]
starts  to build a thick soft wall on the chance a possible baby may have to
be bedded down there." The tiny madman in his padded cell.
     Incidentally: if I ever commit a serious murder . . .  Mark  the  "if."
The urge should be something more than the kind of thing that happened to me
with  Valeria. Carefully mark that then was rather inept. If and when
you wish to sizzle me to death, remember that only a spell of insanity could
ever give me the simple energy to be a brute (all  this  amended,  perhaps).
Sometimes  I attempt to kill in my dreams. But do you know what happens? For
instance I hold a gun. For instance I aim at  a  bland,  quietly  interested
enemy.  Oh,  I  press  the  trigger  all right, but one bullet after another
feebly drops on the floor from the sheepish muzzle. In those dreams, my only
thought is to conceal the fiasco from my foe, who is slowly growing annoyed.
     At dinner tonight the old cat said to  me  with  a  sidelong  gleam  of
motherly  mockery  directed at Lo (I had just been describing, in a flippant
vein, the delightful little toothbrush mustache I had not quite  decided  to
grow):  "Better  don't if somebody is not to go absolutely dotty." Instantly
Lo pushed her plate of boiled fish away, all but knocking her milk over, and
bounced out of the dining room. "Would it bore you very much,"  quoth  Haze,
"to  come with us tomorrow for a swim in Our Glass Lake if Lo apologizes for
her manners?"
     Later, I heard a great banging of doors and other  sounds  coming  from
quaking caverns where the two rivals were having a ripping row.
     She had not apologized. The lake is out. It might have been fun.
     Saturday.  For  some  days  already  I had been leaving the door
ajar, while I wrote in my room; but only today did the  trap  work.  With  a
good  deal  of  additional  fidgeting,  shuffling, scraping--to disguise her
embarrassment at visiting me without having  been  called--Lo  came  in  and
after  pottering  around, became interested in the nightmare curlicues I had
penned on a sheet  of  paper.  Oh  no:  they  were  not  the  outcome  of  a
belle-lettrist's  inspired  pause  between  two  paragraphs;  they  were the
hideous hieroglyphics (which she could not decipher) of my  fatal  lust.  As
she  bent  her  brown curs over the desk at which I was sitting, Humbert the
Hoarse  put   his   arm   around   her   in   a   miserable   imitation   of
blood-relationship;  and  still studying, somewhat shortsightedly, the piece
of paper she held, my innocent little visitor slowly sank to a  half-sitting
position  upon  my  knee.  Her adorable profile, parted lips, warm hair were
some three inches from my bared eyetooth; and I felt the heat of  her  limbs
through her rough tomboy clothes. All at once I knew I could kiss her throat
or  the  wick of her mouth with perfect impunity. I knew she would let me do
so, and even close her eyes as Hollywood teaches. A double vanilla with  hot
fudge--hardly more unusual than that. I cannot tell my learned reader (whose
eyebrows,  I  suspect,  have  by now traveled all the way to the back of his
bald head), I cannot tell him how the  knowledge  came  to  me;  perhaps  my
ape-ear  had  unconsciously  caught  some slight change in the rhythm of her
respiration--for now she was not really looking at my scribble, but  waiting
with  curiosity  and  composure--oh,  my  limpid nymphet!--for the glamorous
lodger to do what he was dying to do. A modern  child,  an  avid  reader  of
movie  magazines,  an expert in dream-slow close-ups, might not think it too
strange, I guessed, if a handsome,  intensely  virile  grown-up  friend--too
late.  The  house was suddenly vibrating with voluble Louise's voice telling
Mrs. Haze who had just come home about  a  dead  something  she  and  Leslie
Tomson had found in the basement, and little Lolita was not one to miss such
a tale.
     Sunday.  Changeful,  bad-tempered,  cheerful,  awkward, graceful
with the tart grace of her coltish subteens, excruciatingly  desirable  from
head  to  foot  (all  New  England for a lady-writer's pen!), from the black
read-made bow and bobby pins holding her hair in place to the little scar on
the lower part of her neat calf (where a roller-skater kicked her in Pisky),
a couple of inches above her rough white sock. Gone with her mother  to  the
Hamiltons--a  birthday  party  or something. Full-skirted gingham frock. Her
little doves seem well formed already. Precocious pet!
     Monday. Rainy morning. "Ces matins gris si doux . . ." My
white pajamas have a lilac design on the  back.  I  am  like  one  of  those
inflated  pale  spiders  you  see in old gardens. Sitting in the middle of a
luminous web and giving little jerks to this or that strand.  My  web
is  spread  all  over the house as I listen from my chair where I sit like a
wily wizard. Is Lo in her room? Gently I tug on the silk. She is  not.  Just
heard the toilet paper cylinder make its staccato sound as it is turned; and
no  footfalls  has my outflung filament traced from the bathroom back to her
room. Is she still brushing her teeth (the only  sanitary  act  Lo  performs
with  real zest)? No. The bathroom door has just slammed, so one has to feel
elsewhere about the house for the beautiful warm-colored prey. Let us have a
strand of silk descend the stairs. I satisfy myself by this means  that  she
is  not  in  the kitchen--not banging the refrigerator door or screeching at
her detested mamma (who, I  suppose,  is  enjoying  her  third,  cooing  and
subduedly  mirthful,  telephone  conversation  of the morning). Well, let us
grope and hope. Ray-like, I glide in through to  the  parlor  and  find  the
radio  silent  (and  mamma still talking to Mrs. Chatfield or Mrs. Hamilton,
very softly, flushed, smiling, cupping the telephone  with  her  free  hand,
denying  by implication that she denies those amusing rumors, rumor, roomer,
whispering intimately, as she never does, the clear-cut  lady,  in  face  to
face  talk).  So my nymphet is not in the house at all! Gone! What I thought
was a prismatic weave turns out to be but an old gray cobweb, the  house  is
empty,  is  dead.  And  then  comes  Lolita's  soft sweet chuckle through my
half-open door "Don't tell Mother but I've  eaten  all  your  bacon."
Gone  when  I  scuttle  out  of my room. Lolita, where are you? My breakfast
tray, lovingly prepared by my landlady, leers at me toothlessly, ready to be
taken in. Lola, Lolita!
     Tuesday. Clouds  again  interfered  with  that  picnic  on  that
unattainable  lake.  Is  it  Fate  scheming? Yesterday I tried on before the
mirror a new pair of bathing trunks.
     Wednesday.  In  the  afternoon,  Haze  (common-sensical   shoes,
tailor-made  dress),  said  she  was driving downtown to buy a present for a
friend of a friend of hers, and would I please come too because I have  such
a   wonderful   taste  in  textures  and  perfumes.  "Choose  your  favorite
seduction," she purred. What could Humbert, being in the  perfume  business,
do? She had me cornered between the front porch and her car. "Hurry up," she
said  as  I laboriously doubled up my large body in order to crawl in (still
desperately devising a means of escape). She had started the engine, and was
genteelly swearing at a backing and turning truck in  front  that  had  just
brought  old invalid Miss Opposite a brand new wheel chair, when my Lolita's
sharp voice came from the parlor window: "You!  Where  are  you  going?  I'm
coming  too!  Wait!" "Ignore her," yelped Haze (killing the motor); alas for
my fair driver; Lo was already pulling at the door  on  my  side.  "This  is
intolerable,"  began  Haze;  but  Lo  had scrambled in, shivering with glee.
"Move your bottom, you," said Lo. "Lo!"  cried  Haze  (sideglancing  at  me,
hoping  I would throw rude Lo out). "And behold," said Lo (not for the first
time), as she jerked back, as I jerked back, as the car leapt  forward.  "It
is  intolerable,"  said  Haze,  violently getting into second, "that a child
should be so ill-mannered. And so very persevering. When she  knows  she  is
unwanted. And needs a bath."
     My knuckles lay against the child's blue jeans. She was barefooted; her
toenails  showed  remnants  of  cherry-red  polish  and  there  was a bit of
adhesive tape across her big toe; and, God, what would I not have  given  to
kiss  then  and  there  those  delicate-boned,  long-toed,  monkeyish  feet!
Suddenly her hand slipped into mine and without  our  chaperon's  seeing,  I
held,  and  stroked,  and  squeezed  that little hot paw, all the way to the
store. The wings of the diver's  Marlenesque  nose  shone,  having  shed  or
burned up their ration of powder, and she kept up an elegant monologue anent
the  local  traffic,  and smiled in profile, and pouted in profile, and beat
her painted lashes in profile, while I prayed we would  never  get  to  that
store, but we did.
     I  have  nothing  else to report, save, primo: that big Haze had
little Haze sit behind on our way home, and secundo:  that  the  lady
decided to keep Humbert's Choice for the backs of her own shapely ears.
     Thursday.  We  are  paying  with  hail and gale for the tropical
beginning  of  the  month.  In   a   volume   of   the   Young   People's
Encyclopedia,  I  found  a  map  of the states that a child's pencil had
started copying out on a sheet of lightweight paper, upon the other side  of
which,  counter to the unfinished outline of Florida and the Gulf, there was
a mimeographed list of names referring,  evidently,  to  her  class  at  the
Ramsdale school. It is a poem I know already by heart.

     A  poem, a poem, forsooth! So strange and sweet was it to discover this
"Haze, Dolores" (she!) in its special bower of names, with its bodyguard  of
roses--a  fairy  princess  between  her  two  maids of honor. I am trying to
analyze the spine-thrill of delight it gives me, this name among  all  those
others.  What  is it that excites me almost to tears (hot, opalescent, thick
tears that poets and lovers shed)? What is it? The tender anonymity of  this
name  with  its  formal  veil ("Dolores") and that abstract transposition of
first name and surname, which is like a pair of new pale gloves or  a  mask?
Is  "mask"  the  keyword?  Is  it  because  there  is  always delight in the
semitranslucent mystery, the flowing charshaf, through which the  flesh  and
the  eye  you alone are elected to know smile in passing at you alone? Or is
it because I can imagine so well the rest of the colorful  classroom  around
my  dolorous  and  hazy  darling:  Grace and her ripe pimples; Ginny and her
lagging leg; Gordon, the  haggard  masturbator;  Duncan,  the  foul-smelling
clown;  nail-biting  Agnes;  Viola, of the blackheads and the bouncing bust;
pretty Rosaline; dark Mary Rose; adorable  Stella,  who  has  let  strangers
touch  her;  Ralph, who bullies and steals; Irving, for whom I am sorry. And
there she is there, lost in  the  middle,  gnawing  a  pencil,  detested  by
teachers, all the boys' eyes on her hair and neck, my Lolita.
     Friday.   I   long   for  some  terrific  disaster.  Earthquake.
Spectacular explosion. Her mother is messily but instantly  and  permanently
eliminated,  along  with everybody else for miles around. Lolita whimpers in
my arms. A free  man,  I  enjoy  her  among  the  ruins.  Her  surprise,  my
explanations, demonstrations, ullulations. Idle and idiotic fancies! A brave
Humbert  would  have  played  with  her  most  disgustingly  (yesterday, for
instance,  when  she  was  again  in  my  room  to  show  me  her  drawings,
school-artware);  he  might have bribed her--and got away with it. A simpler
and more practical fellow would have soberly  stuck  to  various  commercial
substitutes--if  you  know where to go, I don't. Despite my many looks, I am
horribly timid. My romantic soul gets all clammy and shivery at the  thought
of  running  into  some  awful  indecent  unpleasantness.  Those  ribald sea
monsters. "Mais allez-y, allez-y!" Annabel skipping on  one  foot  to
get into her shorts, I seasick with rage, trying to screen her.
     Same date, later, quite late. I have turned on the light to take down a
dream.  It  had  an  evident  antecedent.  Haze  at  dinner had benevolently
proclaimed that since the weather bureau promised a sunny weekend  we  would
go  to  the  lake  Sunday  after  church. As I lay in bed, erotically musing
before trying to go to sleep, I thought of a final scheme how to  profit  by
the  picnic  to  come. I was aware that mother Haze hated my darling for her
being sweet on me. So I planned my lake day with a view  to  satisfying  the
mother.  To  her  alone would I talk; but at some appropriate moment I would
say I had left my wrist watch or my sunglasses  in  that  glade  yonder--and
plunge with my nymphet into the wood. Reality at this juncture withdrew, and
the  Quest for the Glasses turned into a quiet little orgy with a singularly
knowing, cheerful, corrupt and compliant Lolita behaving as reason knew  she
could  not  possibly  behave.  At  3  a.m.  I swallowed a sleeping pill, and
presently, a dream that was not a sequel but a parody revealed to me, with a
kind of meaningful clarity, the lake I had never yet visited: it was  glazed
over with a sheet of emerald ice, and a pockmarked Eskimo was trying in vain
to  break it with a pickax, although imported mimosas and oleanders flowered
on its gravelly banks. I am sure Dr. Blanche Schwarzmann would have paid  me
a   sack   of   schillings  for  adding  such  a  libidream  to  her  files.
Unfortunately, the rest of it was frankly eclectic. Big Haze and little Haze
rode on horseback around the lake, and I rode too, dutifully bobbing up  and
down,  bowlegs  astraddle  although  there  was  no horse between them, only
elastic air--one of those little omissions due to  the  absentmindedness  of
the dream agent.
     Saturday.  My  heart  is still thumping. I still squirm and emit
low moans of remembered embarrassment.
     Dorsal view. Glimpse of  shiny  skin  between  T-shirt  and  white  gym
shorts. Bending, over a window sill, in the act of tearing off leaves from a
poplar outside while engrossed in torrential talk with a newspaper boy below
(Kenneth   Knight,   I   suspect)   who  had  just  propelled  the  Ramsdale
Journal with a very precise thud onto the porch. I began creeping  up
to  her--"crippling"  up  to  her as pantomimists say. My arms and legs were
convex surfaces between which--rather than upon which--I  slowly  progressed
by some neutral means of locomotion: Humbert the Wounded Spider. I must have
taken  hours  to  reach  her: I seemed to see her through the wrong end of a
telescope, and toward her taut little rear I moved like some  paralytic,  on
soft  distorted limbs, in terrible concentration. At last I was right behind
her when I had the unfortunate idea of blustering a trifle--shaking  her  by
the   scruff  of  the  neck  and  that  sort  of  thing  to  cover  my  real
manхge, and she said in a shrill brief  whine:  "Cut  it  out!"--most
coarsely,  the little wench, and with a ghastly grin Humbert the Humble beat
a gloomy retreat while she went on wisecracking streetward.
     But now listen to what happened next. After lunch I was reclining in  a
low  chair trying to read. Suddenly two deft little hands were over my eyes:
she had crept up from behind as if re-enacting, in  a  ballet  sequence,  my
morning  maneuver. Her fingers were a luminous crimson as they tried to blot
out the sun, and she uttered hiccups of laughter and  jerked  this  way  and
that as I stretched my arm sideways and backwards without otherwise changing
my  recumbent  position. My hand swept over her agile giggling legs, and the
book like a sleigh  left  my  lap,  and  Mrs.  Haze  strolled  up  and  said
indulgently:  "Just  slap  her  hard  if  she interferes with your scholarly
meditations. How I love this garden [no exclamation mark in her tone]. Isn't
it divine in the sun [no question mark either]." And with a sign of  feigned
content,  the obnoxious lady sank down on the grass and looked up at the sky
as she leaned back on her splayed-out  hands,  and  presently  an  old  gray
tennis  ball bounced over her, and Lo's voice came from the house haughtily:
"Pardonnez, Mother. I was not aiming at you." Of  course  not,
my hot downy darling.

This  proved  to  be  the last of twenty entries or so. It will be seem
from them that for all the devil's inventiveness, the scheme remained  daily
the  same.  First  he  would tempt me--and then thwart me, leaving me with a
dull pain in the very root of my being. I knew exactly what I wanted to  do,
and  how to do it, without impinging on a child's chastity; after all, I had
had some experience in my life of pederosis; had  visually  possessed
dappled  nymphets  in  parks;  had  wedged  my wary and bestial way into the
hottest, most crowded corner of a  city  bus  full  of  straphanging  school
children.  But  for  almost  three  weeks  I  had been interrupted in all my
pathetic machinations. The agent of these interruptions was usually the Haze
woman (who, as the reader will mark, was more afraid of Lo's  deriving  some
pleasure  from  me  than of my enjoying Lo). The passion I had developed for
that nymphet--for the first nymphet in my life that could be reached at last
by my awkward, aching, timid claws--would have certainly landed me again  in
a  sanatorium,  had  not  the  devil  realized that I was to be granted some
relief if he wanted to have me as a plaything for some time longer.
     The reader has also marked the curious Mirage of  the  Lake.  It  would
have  been logical on the part of Aubrey McFate (as I would like to dub that
devil of mine) to arrange a small treat for me on the promised beach, in the
presumed forest. Actually, the promise Mrs. Haze had made was  a  fraudulent
one:  she  had  not told me that Mary Rose Hamilton (a dark little beauty in
her own right) was  to  come  too,  and  that  the  two  nymphets  would  be
whispering  apart,  and  playing  apart,  and  having  a  good  time  all by
themselves, while Mrs. Haze and her handsome lodger  conversed  sedately  in
the  seminude,  far from prying eyes. Incidentally, eyes did pry and tongues
did wag. How queer life is! We hasten to alienate the very fates we intended
to woo. Before my actual arrival, my landlady had planned  to  have  an  old
spinster,  a  Miss Phalen, whose mother had been cook in Mrs. Haze's family,
come to stay in the house with Lolita and me, while Mrs. Haze, a career girl
at heart, sought some suitable job in the nearest city. Mrs. Haze  had  seen
the  whole  situation  very  clearly:  the  bespectacled,  round-backed Herr
Humbert coming with his Central-European trunks to gather dust in his corner
behind a heap  of  old  books;  the  unloved  ugly  little  daughter  firmly
supervised  by  Miss Phalen who had already once had my Lo under her buzzard
wing (Lo recalled that 1944 summer with an indignant shudder); and Mrs. Haze
herself engaged as a receptionist in a great elegant city.  But  a  not  too
complicated event interfered with that program. Miss Phalen broke her hip in
Savannah, Ga., on the very day I arrived in Ramsdale.

The  Sunday after the Saturday already described proved to be as bright
as the weatherman had predicted. When putting the breakfast things  back  on
the chair outside my room for my good landlady to remove at her convenience,
I gleaned the following situation by listening from the landing across which
I had softly crept to the banisters in my old bedroom slippers--the only old
things about me.
     There  had  been  another  row.  Mrs.  Hamilton had telephoned that her
daughter "was running a temperature." Mrs. Haze informed her daughter
that the picnic would have to be postponed. Hot  little  Haze  informed  big
cold Haze that, if so, she would not go with her to church. Mother said very
well and left.
     I  had  come out on the landing straight after shaving, soapy-earlobed,
still in my white pajamas with the cornflower blue (not the lilac) design on
the back; I now wiped off the soap, perfumed my hair and armpits, slipped on
a purple silk dressing gown, and, humming nervously, went down the stairs in
quest of Lo.
     I want my learned readers to participate in the scene  I  am  about  to
replay;  I  want them to examine its every detail and see for themselves how
careful, how chaste, the whole wine-sweet event is if viewed  with  what  my
lawyer  has  called, in a private talk we have had, "impartial sympathy." So
let us get started. I have a difficult job before me.
     Main character: Humbert the  Hummer.  Time:  Sunday  morning  in  June.
Place:  sunlit  living room. Props: old, candy-striped davenport, magazines,
phonograph, Mexican knickknacks (the late Mr. Harold E. Haze--God bless  the
good  man--had  engendered  my  darling  at the siesta hour in a blue-washed
room, on a honeymoon trip to Vera Cruz, and mementoes, among these  Dolores,
were  all over the place). She wore that day a pretty print dress that I had
seen on  her  once  before,  ample  in  the  skirt,  tight  in  the  bodice,
short-sleeved,  pink, checkered with darker pink, and, to complete the color
scheme, she had painted her lips and was holding in  her  hollowed  hands  a
beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple. She was not shod, however, for church. And
her white Sunday purse lay discarded near the phonograph.
     My  heart  beat  like  a  drum  as she sat down, cool skirt ballooning,
subsiding, on the sofa next to me, and played with  her  glossy  fruit.  She
tossed  it  up  into  the  sun-dusted  air,  and caught it--it made a cupped
polished plot.
     Humbert Humbert intercepted the apple.
     "Give it back," - she pleaded, showing the marbled flush of her  palms.
I  produced Delicious. She grasped it and bit into it, and my heart was like
snow under thin crimson skin, and with the monkeyish nimbleness that was  so
typical  of  that American nymphet, she snatched out of my abstract grip the
magazine I had opened (pity no film had recorded the  curious  pattern,  the
monogrammic  linkage  of  our  simultaneous  or overlapping moves). Rapidly,
hardly hampered by the disfigured  apple  she  held,  Lo  flipped  violently
through the pages in search of something she wished Humbert to see. Found it
at last. I faked interest by bringing my head so close that her hair touched
my temple and her arm brushed my cheek as she wiped her lips with her wrist.
Because  of  the burnished mist through which I peered at the picture, I was
slow in reacting to it, and her bare knees rubbed  and  knocked  impatiently
against  each  other.  Dimly  there  came  into  view:  a surrealist painter
relaxing, supine, on a beach, and  near  him,  likewise  supine,  a  plaster
replica of the Venus di Milo, half-buried in sand. Picture of the Week, said
the  legend.  I whisked the whole obscene thing away. Next moment, in a sham
effort to retrieve it, she was all over me. Caught her by  her  thin  knobby
wrist.  The magazine escaped to the floor like a flustered fowl. She twisted
herself free, recoiled, and  lay  back  in  the  right-hand  corner  of  the
davenport.  Then,  with  perfect simplicity, the impudent child extended her
legs across my lap.
     By this time I was in a state of excitement bordering on insanity;  but
I  also had the cunning of the insane. Sitting there, on the sofa, I managed
to attune, by a  series  of  stealthy  movements,  my  masked  lust  to  her
guileless  limbs.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to  divert the little maiden's
attention while I  performed  the  obscure  adjustments  necessary  for  the
success  of  the trick. Talking fast, lagging behind my own breath, catching
up with it, mimicking a  sudden  toothache  to  explain  the  breaks  in  my
patter--and  all the while keeping a maniac's inner eye on my distant golden
goal, I cautiously increased the magic friction that was doing away,  in  an
illusional,  if  not  factual,  sense,  with the physically irremovable, but
psychologically very friable texture of the  material  divide  (pajamas  and
robe)  between  the weight of two sunburnt legs, resting athwart my lap, and
the hidden tumor of an unspeakable passion. Having,  in  the  course  of  my
patter,  hit  upon  something  nicely  mechanical,  I recited, garbling them
slightly, the words of a foolish song that was then popular--O my Carmen, my
little Carmen, something, something, those something nights, and the  stars,
and  the cars, and the bars, and the barmen; I kept repeating this automatic
stuff and holding  her  under  its  special  spell  (spell  because  of  the
garbling),  and  all  the  while  I was mortally afraid that some act of God
might interrupt me, might remove the golden load in the sensation  of  which
all  my  being  seemed concentrated, and this anxiety forced me to work, for
the first minute or so, more hastily than was consensual  with  deliberately
modulated enjoyment. The stars that sparkled, and the cars that parkled, and
the  bars, and the barmen, were presently taken over by her; her voice stole
and  corrected  the  tune  I  had  been  mutilating.  She  was  musical  and
apple-sweet.  Her  legs  twitched a little as they lay across my live lap; I
stroked them; there she lolled in the  right-hand  corner,  almost  asprawl,
Lola  the  bobby-soxer,  devouring her immemorial fruit, singing through its
juice, losing her slipper, rubbing the heel of her slipperless foot  in  its
sloppy  anklet,  against  the pile of old magazines heaped on my left on the
sofa--and every movement she made, every shuffle and ripple,  helped  me  to
conceal  and  to improve the secret system of tactile correspondence between
beast and beauty--between my gagged, bursting beast and the  beauty  of  her
dimpled body in its innocent cotton frock.
     Under  my  glancing finger tips I felt the minute hairs bristle ever so
slightly along her shins. I lost myself in  the  pungent  but  healthy  heat
which  like summer haze hung about little Haze. Let her stay, let her stay .
. . As she strained to chuck the  core  of  her  abolished  apple  into  the
fender,  her  young  weight, her shameless innocent shanks and round bottom,
shifted in my tense, tortured, surreptitiously laboring lap; and  all  of  a
sudden  a  mysterious change came over my senses. I entered a plane of being
where nothing mattered, save the infusion of joy brewed within my body. What
had begun as a delicious distention of my innermost roots became  a  glowing
tingle  which  now  had  reached  that  state  of  absolute security,
confidence and reliance not found elsewhere in conscious life. With the deep
hot sweetness  thus  established  and  well  on  its  way  to  the  ultimate
convulsion,  I  felt  I could slow down in order to prolong the glow. Lolita
had been safely  solipsized.  The  implied  sun  pulsated  in  the  supplied
poplars;  we  were  fantastically  and  divinely alone; I watched her, rosy,
gold-dusted, beyond the veil of my controlled delight, unaware of it,  alien
to  it,  and  the  sun  was  on her lips, and her lips were apparently still
forming the words of the Carmen-barmen  ditty  that  no  longer  reached  my
consciousness.  Everything  was  now  ready. The nerves of pleasure had been
laid bare. The corpuscles of Krause were entering the phase of  frenzy.  The
least  pressure  would suffice to set all paradise loose. I had ceased to be
Humbert the Hound, the sad-eyed degenerate cur clasping the boot that  would
presently  kick  him  away. I was above the tribulations of ridicule, beyond
the possibilities of retribution. In my self-made seraglio, I was a  radiant
and  robust  Turk,  deliberately,  in the full consciousness of his freedom,
postponing the moment of actually enjoying the youngest and frailest of  his
slaves.  Suspended  on  the  brink  of  that  voluptuous  abyss (a nicety of
physiological equipoise comparable to certain techniques in the arts) I kept
repeating the chance words after  her--barmen,  alarmin',  my  charmin',  my
carmen,  ahmen,  ahahamen--as one talking and laughing in his sleep while my
happy hand crept up her sunny leg as far as the shadow of  decency  allowed.
The day before she had collided with the heavy chest in the hall and--"Look,
look!"--I  gasped--"look what you've done, what you've done to yourself, ah,
look"; for there was, I swear,  a  yellowish-violet  bruise  on  her  lovely
nymphet  thigh  which  my huge hairy hand massaged and slowly enveloped--and
because of her very perfunctory underthings, there seemed to be  nothing  to
prevent my muscular thumb from reaching the hot hollow of her groin--just as
you  might  tickle  and  caress  a giggling child--just that--and: "Oh, it's
nothing at all," she cried with a sudden shrill note in her voice,  and  she
wiggled,  and squirmed, and threw her head back, and her teeth rested on her
glistening underlip as she half-turned away, and my moaning mouth, gentlemen
of the jury, almost reached her bare neck, while I crushed out  against  her
left  buttock  the last throb of the longest ecstasy man or monster had ever
known.
     Immediately afterward (as if we had been struggling and now my grip had
eased) she rolled off  the  sofa  and  jumped  to  her  feet--to  her  foot,
rather--in  order  to  attend to the formidably loud telephone that may have
been ringing for ages as far  as  I  was  concerned.  There  she  stood  and
blinked,  cheeks  aflame,  hair awry, her eyes passing over me as lightly as
they did over the furniture, and as she listened or spoke (to her mother who
was telling her to come to lunch with her at the Chatfileds--neither Lo  nor
Hum  knew yet what busybody Haze was plotting), she kept tapping the edge of
the table with the slipper she held in her hand. Blessed be  the  Lord,  she
had noticed nothing!
     With  a  handkerchief of multicolored silk, on which her listening eyes
rested in passing, I wiped the sweat off my forehead,  and,  immersed  in  a
euphoria  of  release,  rearranged  my  royal  robes.  She  was still at the
telephone, haggling with her mother (wanted to be fetched by car, my  little
Carmen)  when,  singing  louder  and louder, I swept up the stairs and set a
deluge of steaming water roaring into the tub.
     At this point I may as well give the words of that song hit in full--to
the best of my recollection at least--I don't think I  ever  had  it  right.
Here goes:

     O my Carmen, my little Carmen!
     Something, something those something nights,
     And the stars, and the cars, and the bars and the barmen--
     And, O my charmin', our dreadful fights.
     And the something town where so gaily, arm in
     Arm, we went, and our final row,
     And the gun I killed you with, O my Carmen,
     The gun I am holding now.

     (Drew  his  .32 automatic, I guess, and put a bullet through his moll's
eye.)

I had lunch in town--had not been so hungry for years.  The  house  was
still  Lo-less when I strolled back. I spent the afternoon musing, scheming,
blissfully digesting my experience of the morning.
     I felt proud of myself. I had stolen  the  honey  of  a  spasm  without
impairing  the  morals of a minor. Absolutely no harm done. The conjurer had
poured milk, molasses, foaming champagne  into  a  young  lady's  new  white
purse;  and  lo,  the purse was intact. Thus had I delicately constructed my
ignoble, ardent, sinful dream; and still Lolita was safe--and  I  was  safe.
What  I  had  madly  possessed  was  not  she, but my own creation, another,
fanciful Lolita--perhaps, more real than Lolita; overlapping, encasing  her;
floating  between  me and her, and having no will, no consciousness--indeed,
no life of her own.
     The child knew  nothing.  I  had  done  nothing  to  her.  And  nothing
prevented  me from repeating a performance that affected her as little as if
she were a photographic  image  rippling  upon  a  screen  and  I  a  humble
hunchback  abusing  myself  in the dark. The afternoon drifted on and on, in
ripe silence, and the sappy tall trees seemed to be in the know; and desire,
even stronger than before, began to afflict me again. Let her come  soon,  I
prayed,  addressing  a  loan  God,  and while mamma is in the kitchen, let a
repetition of the  davenport  scene  be  staged,  please,  I  adore  her  so
horribly.
     No:  "horribly" is the wrong word. The elation with which the vision of
new delights filled me was not  horrible  but  pathetic.  I  qualify  it  as
pathetic.  Pathetic--because  despite  the  insatiable  fire  of my venereal
appetite, I intended, with the most fervent force and foresight, to  protect
the purity of that twelve-year-old child.
     And now see how I was repaid for my pains. No Lolita came home--she had
gone with  the  Chatfields to a movie. The table was laid with more elegance
than usual: candlelight, if you please. In  this  mawkish  aura,  Mrs.  Haze
gently  touched  the  silver on both sides of her plate as if touching piano
keys, and smiled down on her empty plate (was on a diet), and said she hoped
I liked the salad (recipe lifted from a woman's magazine). She hoped I liked
the cold cuts, too. It had been a perfect day. Mrs. Chatfield was  a  lovely
person.  Phyllis,  her  daughter,  was  going to a summer camp tomorrow. For
three weeks. Lolita, it was decided, would go Thursday. Instead  of  waiting
till  July,  as had been initially planned. And stay there after Phyllis had
left. Till school began. A pretty prospect, my heart.
     Oh, how I was taken aback--for did it not mean I was losing my darling,
just when I had secretly made her mine? To explain my grim mood,  I  had  to
use  the  same  toothache  I had already simulated in the morning. Must have
been an enormous molar, with an abscess as big as a maraschino cherry.
     "We have," said Haze, "an excellent dentist. Our neighbor, in fact. Dr.
Quilty. Uncle or cousin, I think, of the playwright.  Think  it  will  pass?
Well,  just  as  you  wish.  In the fall I shall have him 'brace' her, as my
mother used to say. It may curb Lo a  little.  I  am  afraid  she  has  been
bothering  you  frightfully  all  these  days. And we are in for a couple of
stormy ones before she goes. She has flatly refused to go, and I  confess  I
left  her  with the Chatfields because I dreaded to face her alone just yet.
The movie may mollify her. Phyllis is a very sweet girl,  and  there  is  no
earthly  reason  for  Lo  to  dislike her. Really, monsieur, I am very sorry
about that tooth of yours. It would be so much more  reasonable  to  let  me
contact Ivor Quilty first thing tomorrow morning if it still hurts. And, you
know,  I  think  a summer camp is so much healthier, and--well, it is all so
much more reasonable as I say than to mope on a suburban lawn and use
mamma's lipstick, and pursue shy studious gentlemen, and go into tantrums at
the least provocation."
     "Are you sure," I said at last, "that she will be happy there?"  (lame,
lamentably lame!)
     "She'd  better,"  said Haze. "And it won't be all play either. The camp
is run  by  Shirley  Holmes--you  know,  the  woman  who  wrote  Campfire
Girl.  Camp  will  teach  Dolores  Haze  to grow in many things--health,
knowledge, temper. And particularly in a  sense  of  responsibility  towards
other people. Shall we take these candles with us and sit for a while on the
piazza, or do you want to go to bed and nurse that tooth?"
     Nurse that tooth.

Next  day  they  drove  downtown to buy things needed for the camp: any
wearable purchase worked wonders with Lo. She  seemed  her  usual  sarcastic
self  at  dinner.  Immediately afterwards, she went up to her room to plunge
into the comic books acquired for  rainy  days  at  Camp  Q  (they  were  so
thoroughly  sampled by Thursday that she left them behind). I too retired to
my lair, and wrote letters. My plan now was to leave  for  the  seaside  and
then,  when  school  began, resume my existence in the Haze household; for I
knew already that I could not live without the child. On Tuesday  they  went
shopping  again,  and  I  was asked to answer the phone if the camp mistress
rang up during their absence. She did; and  a  month  or  so  later  we  had
occasion to recall our pleasant chat. That Tuesday, Lo had her dinner in her
room.  She  had  been crying after a routine row with her mother and, as had
happened on former occasions, had not wished me to see her swollen eyes: she
had one of those tender complexions that after a good cry  get  all  blurred
and inflamed, and morbidly alluring. I regretted keenly her mistake about my
private  aesthetics, for I simply love that tinge of Botticellian pink, that
raw rose about the lips, those wet, matted eyelashes;  and,  naturally,  her
bashful  whim  deprived  me  of  many opportunities of specious consolation.
There was, however, more to it than I thought. As we sat in the darkness  of
the  verandah (a rude wind had put out her red candles), Haze, with a dreary
laugh, said she had told Lo that her beloved Humbert thoroughly approved  of
the whole camp idea "and now," added Haze, "the child throws a fit; pretext:
you  and  I  want  to  get  rid  of  her; actual reason: I told her we would
exchange tomorrow for plainer stuff some much too cute night things that she
bullied me into buying for her.  You  see,  she  sees  herself  as  a
starlet;  I  see  her as a sturdy, healthy, but decidedly homely kid.
This, I guess, is at the root of our troubles."
     On Wednesday I managed to waylay Lo for a few seconds: she was  on  the
landing, in sweatshirt and green-stained white shorts, rummaging in a trunk.
I said something meant to be friendly and funny but she only emitted a snort
without  looking  at me. Desperate, dying Humbert patted her clumsily on her
coccyx, and she struck him, quite painfully, with one of the late Mr. Haze's
shoetrees. "Doublecrosser," she said as I crawled downstairs rubbing my  arm
with a great show of rue. She did not condescend to have dinner with Hum and
mum:  washed  her  hair  and  went  to bed with her ridiculous books. And on
Thursday quiet Mrs. Haze drove her to Camp Q.
     As greater authors than I have put it: "Let readers  imagine"  etc.  On
second thought, I may as well give those imaginations a kick in the pants. I
knew I had fallen in love with Lolita forever; but I also knew she would not
be  forever  Lolita.  She would be thirteen on January 1. In two years or so
she would cease being a nymphet and would turn  into  a  "young  girl,"  and
then,  into  a  "college  girl"--that  horror of horrors. The word "forever"
referred only to my own passion, to the eternal Lolita as  reflected  in  my
blood.  The  Lolita  whose  iliac crests had not yet flared, the Lolita that
today I could touch and smell and hear and see, the Lolita of  the  strident
voice and rich brown hair--of the bangs and the swirls and the sides and the
curls   at   the   back,   and   the   sticky   hot  neck,  and  the  vulgar
vocabulary--"revolting," "super,"  "luscious,"  "goon,"  "drip"--that
Lolita,  my  Lolita, poor Catullus would lose forever. So how could I
afford not to see her for two months of summer insomnias? Two  whole  months
out  of the two years of her remaining nymphage! Should I disguise myself as
a somber old-fashioned girl, gawky Mlle Humbert, and put up my tent  on  the
outskirts of Camp Q, in the hope that its russet nymphets would clamor: "Let
us  adopt  that  deep-voiced  D.P.," and drag the said, shyly smiling Berthe
au Grand Pied to their rustic hearth. Berthe will sleep with  Dolores
Haze!
     Idle  dry dreams. Two months of beauty, two months of tenderness, would
be squandered forever, and I could do nothing about it, but nothing, mais
rien.
     One drop of rare honey, however, that Thursday did hold  in  its  acorn
cup.  Haze  was  to  drive her to the camp in the early morning. Upon sundry
sounds of departure reaching me, I rolled out of bed and leaned out  of  the
window.  Under  the  poplars,  the  car was already athrob. On the sidewalk,
Louise stood shading her eyes with her hand, as if the little traveler  were
already riding into the low morning sun. The gesture proved to be premature.
"Hurry  up!"  shouted Haze. My Lolita, who was half in and about to slam the
car door, wind down the glass, wave to Louise  and  the  poplars  (whom  and
which  she  was  never  to  see  again), interrupted the motion of fate: she
looked up--and dashed back into the  house  (Haze  furiously  calling  after
her).  A  moment later I heard my sweetheart running up the stairs. My heart
expanded with such force that it almost blotted me out.  I  hitched  up  the
pants of my pajamas, flung the door open: and simultaneously Lolita arrived,
in  her  Sunday  frock,  stamping, panting, and then she was in my arms, her
innocent mouth melting under the ferocious pressure of dark  male  jaws,  my
palpitating  darling!  The next instant I heart her--alive, unraped--clatter
downstairs. The motion of fate was resumed. The blond leg was pulled in, the
car door was slammed--was re-slammed--and driver Haze at the violent  wheel,
rubber-red  lips writhing in angry, inaudible speech, swung my darling away,
while unnoticed by them or Louise, old Miss Opposite, an invalid, feebly but
rhythmically waved from her vined verandah.

The hollow of my hand was still ivory-full of Lolita--full of the  feel
of  her pre-adolescently incurved back, that ivory-smooth, sliding sensation
of her skin through the thin frock that I had worked up  and  down  while  I
held  her.  I  marched  into  her  tumbled  room, threw open the door of the
closet, and plunged into a heap of crumpled things  that  had  touched  her.
There  was particularly one pink texture, sleazy, torn, with a faintly acrid
odor in the seam. I wrapped in it Humbert's huge engorged heart. A  poignant
chaos  was  welling  within me--but I had to drop those things and hurriedly
regain my composure, as I became aware of the maid's velvety  voice  calling
me  softly from the stairs. She had a message for me, she said; and, topping
my automatic thanks with a kindly "you're  welcome,"  good  Louise  left  an
unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter in my shaking hand.

     "This  is  a  confession.  I  love  you [so the letter began; and for a
distorted  moment  I  mistook  its  hysterical  scrawl  for  a  schoolgirl's
scribble].  Last  Sunday  in church--bad you, who refused to come to see our
beautiful new windows!--only last Sunday, my dear one, when I asked the Lord
what to do about it, I was told to act as I am acting now. You see, there is
no alternative. I have loved  you  from  the  minute  I  saw  you.  I  am  a
passionate and lonely woman and you are the love of my life.
     Now, my dearest, dearest, mon cher, cher monsieur, you have read
this;  now  you  know.  So, will you please, at once, pack and leave.
This is a landlady's order. I am dismissing a lodger. I am kicking you  out.
Go!  Scram!  Departez!  I shall be back by dinnertime, if I do eighty
both ways and don't have an accident (but what would it matter?), and  I  do
not  wish  to  find  you  in  the  house.  Please,  please,  leave  at once,
now, do not even read this absurd note to the end. Go. Adieu.
     The situation, chиri, is quite simple. Of course,  I  know  with
absolute  certainty  that I am nothing to you, nothing at all to you,
nothing at all. Oh yes, you enjoy talking to me (and kidding poor  me),  you
have  grown  fond  of  our friendly house, of the books I like, of my lovely
garden, even of Lo's noisy ways--but I am  nothing  to  you.  Right?  Right.
Nothing  to  you whatever. But if, after reading my "confession," you
decided, in your dark romantic European way, that I am attractive enough for
you to take advantage of my letter and make a pass at me, then you would  be
a  criminal--worse  than  a  kidnaper  who rapes a child. You see, chиri.
If you decided to stay, if I found you at home (which  I  know  I
won't--and that's why I am able to go on like this), the fact of your
remaining  would  only mean one thing: that you want me as much as I do you:
as a lifelong mate; and that you are ready to link up your  life  with  mine
forever and ever and be a father to my little girl.
     Let  me  rave and ramble on for a teeny while more, my dearest, since I
know this letter has been by now torn by you, and its pieces (illegible)  in
the  vortex  of  the  toilet. My dearest, mon trхs, trхs cher, what a
world of love I have built up for you during this miraculous  June!  I  know
how reserved you are, how "British." Your old-world reticence, your sense of
decorum  may be shocked by the boldness of an American girl! You who conceal
your strongest feelings must think me a shameless little idiot for  throwing
open my poor bruised heart like this. In years gone by, many disappointments
came  my  way.  Mr.  Haze  was  a  splendid  person, a sterling soul, but he
happened to be twenty years my senior, and--well, let us  not  gossip  about
the  past.  My  dearest,  your  curiosity must be well satisfied if you have
ignored my request and read this letter  to  the  bitter  end.  Never  mind.
Destroy  it and go. Do not forget to leave the key on the desk in your room.
And some scrap of address so that I could refund the twelve  dollars  I  owe
you  till the end of the month. Good-bye, dear one. Pray for me--if you ever
pray.
                             C.H."

     What I present here is what I  remember  of  the  letter,  and  what  I
remember of the letter I remember verbatim (including that awful French). It
was at least twice longer. I have left out a lyrical passage which I more or
less skipped at the time, concerning Lolita's brother who died at 2 when she
was  4, and how much I would have liked him. Let me see what else can I say?
Yes. There is just a chance that "the  vortex  of  the  toilet"  (where  the
letter did go) is my own matter-of-fact contribution. She probably begged me
to make a special fire to consume it.
     My  first movement was one of repulsion and retreat. My second was like
a friend's calm hand falling upon my shoulder and bidding me take my time. I
did. I came out of my daze and found myself still in Lo's room. A  full-page
ad  ripped  out  of  a slick magazine was affixed to the wall above the bed,
between a crooner's mug and the lashes of a movie actress. It represented  a
dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in his Irish eyes. He
was modeling a robe by So-and-So and holding a bridgelike tray by So-and-So,
with breakfast for two. The legend, by the Rev. Thomas Morell, called him  a
"conquering  hero." The thoroughly conquered lady (not shown) was presumably
propping herself up to receive her half of the tray. How her bed-fellow  was
to  get  under  the  bridge  without some messy mishap was not clear. Lo had
drawn a jocose arrow to the haggard lover's  face  and  had  put,  in  block
letters:  H.H.  And  indeed,  despite  a  difference  of  a  few  years, the
resemblance was striking. Under this was another picture, also a colored ad.
A distinguished playwright was solemnly smoking a Drome.  He  always  smoked
Dromes.  The resemblance was slight. Under this was Lo's chase bed, littered
with "comics." The enamel had come off the bedstead, leaving black, more  or
less  rounded,  marks  on the white. Having convinced myself that Louise had
left, I got into Lo's bed and reread the letter.

Gentlemen of the jury! I cannot swear that certain  motions  pertaining
to the business in hand--if I may coin an expression--had not drifted across
my  mind before. My mind had not retained them in any logical form or in any
relation to definitely recollected occasions; but  I  cannot  swear--let  me
repeat--that  I  had not toyed with them (to rig up yet another expression),
in my dimness of thought, in my darkness of passion.  There  may  have  been
times--there  must have been times, if I know my Humbert--when I had brought
up for detached inspection  the  idea  of  marrying  a  mature  widow  (say,
Charlotte Haze) with not one relative left in the wide gray world, merely in
order  to  have my way with her child (Lo, Lola, Lolita). I am even prepared
to tell my tormentors that perhaps once or twice I had cast  an  appraiser's
cold  eye  at  Charlotte's  coral  lips  and bronze hair and dangerously low
neckline, and had vaguely tried to fit her into a plausible daydream. This I
confess  under  torture.  Imaginary  torture,  perhaps,  but  all  the  more
horrible.  I  wish  I  might  digress  and  tell  you  more  of the pavor
nocturnus that would rack me at night hideously after a chance term  had
struck  me  in  the random readings of my boyhood, such as peine forte et
dure (what a Genius of Pain must have invented that!) or  the  dreadful,
mysterious,  insidious words "trauma," "traumatic event," and "transom." But
my tale is sufficiently incondite already.
     After a while  I  destroyed  the  letter  and  went  to  my  room,  and
ruminated,  and  rumpled  my  hair,  and  modeled my purple robe, and moaned
through clenched teeth and suddenly--Suddenly, gentlemen of the jury, I felt
a Dostoevskian grin dawning (through the very grimace that twisted my  lips)
like  a  distant  and  terrible sun. I imagined (under conditions of new and
perfect visibility) all the casual caresses her mother's  husband  would  be
able to lavish on his Lolita. I would hold her against me three times a day,
every  day. All my troubles would be expelled, I would be a healthy man. "To
hold thee lightly on a gentle knee and print on thy soft  cheek  a  parent's
kiss . . ." Well-read Humbert!
     Then,  with  all  possible  caution,  on  mental  tiptoe so to speak, I
conjured up Charlotte as a possible mate. By God, I could make myself  bring
her that economically halved grapefruit, that sugarless breakfast.
     Humbert  Humbert sweating in the fierce white light, and howled at, and
trodden upon  by  sweating  policemen,  is  now  ready  to  make  a  further
"statement"  (quel  mot!)  as  he turns his conscience inside out and
rips off its innermost lining. I did not plan to  marry  poor  Charlotte  in
order to eliminate her in some vulgar, gruesome and dangerous manner such as
killing her by placing five bichloride-of-mercury tablets in her preprandial
sherry  or  anything  like  that;  but  a  delicately allied, pharmacopoeial
thought did tinkle in my sonorous and clouded brain. Why limit myself to the
modest masked caress I had tried already? Other visions of venery  presented
themselves  to me swaying and smiling. I saw myself administering a powerful
sleeping potion to both mother and daughter  so  as  to  fondle  the  latter
though  the  night  with perfect impunity. The house was full of Charlotte's
snore, while Lolita hardly breathed in her sleep,  as  still  as  a  painted
girl-child.  "Mother,  I  swear  Kenny  never  even touched me." "You
either lie, Dolores Haze, or it was an incubus." No, I  would  not  go  that
far.
     So Humbert the Cubus schemed and dreamed--and the red sun of desire and
decision  (the  two things that create a live world) rose higher and higher,
while upon a succession of balconies a succession of  libertines,  sparkling
glass  in  hand,  toasted  the  bliss  of  past  and  future  nights.  Then,
figuratively speaking, I shattered the glass, and boldly imagined (for I was
drunk on those visions by then and underrated the gentleness of  my  nature)
how  eventually  I might blackmail--no, that it too strong a word--mauvemail
big Haze into letting me consort with the little Haze by gently  threatening
the  poor doting Big Dove with desertion if she tried to bar me from playing
with my legal stepdaughter. In a word, before such an Amazing Offer,  before
such  a  vastness  and  variety  of vistas, I was as helpless as Adam at the
preview of early oriental history, miraged in his apple orchard.
     And now take down the following important remark: the artist in me  has
been  given  the upper hand over the gentleman. It is with a great effort of
will that in this memoir I have managed to tune my style to the tone of  the
journal  that  I kept when Mrs. Haze was to me but an obstacle. That journal
of mine is no more; but I have considered it my artistic  duty  to  preserve
its  intonations  no  matter  how  false and brutal they may seem to me now.
Fortunately, my story has reached a point where I can cease  insulting  poor
Charlotte for the sake of retrospective verisimilitude.
     Wishing  to  spare  poor  Charlotte two or three hours of suspense on a
winding road (and avoid, perhaps, a head-on collision that would shatter our
different dreams), I made a thoughtful but abortive attempt to reach her  at
the  camp  by  telephone.  She  had left half an hour before, and getting Lo
instead, I told her--trembling and brimming with my mastery over  fate--that
I  was going to marry her mother. I had to repeat it twice because something
was preventing her from giving me her attention. "Gee,  that's  swell,"  she
said  laughing.  "When is the wedding? Hold on a sec, the pup--That put here
has got hold of my sock. Listen--" and she added she guessed she  was  going
to  have  loads  of  fun  . . . and I realized as I hung up that a couple of
hours at that camp had been sufficient to blot out with new impressions  the
image of handsome Humbert Humbert from little Lolita's mind. But what did it
matter  now?  I  would get her back as soon as a decent amount of time after
the wedding had elapsed. "The orange blossom would have scarcely withered on
the grave," as a poet might have said. But I am no poet. I am  only  a  very
conscientious recorder.
     After  Louise had gone, I inspected the icebox, and finding it much too
puritanic, walked to town and bought the richest  foods  available.  I  also
bought  some  good  liquor  and two or three kinds of vitamins. I was pretty
sure that with the aid of these stimulants and my natural resources, I would
avert any embarrassment that my indifference might incur when called upon to
display a strong and impatient flame. Again and  again  resourceful  Humbert
evoked  Charlotte  as seen in the raree-show of a manly imagination. She was
well groomed and shapely, this I could say for her, and she was my  Lolita's
big  sister--this  notion,  perhaps,  I  could  keep  up  if  only I did not
visualize too realistically her heavy hips,  round  knees,  ripe  bust,  the
coarse  pink  skin  of her neck ("coarse" by comparison with silk and honey)
and all the rest of that sorry and dull thing: a handsome woman.
     The sun made its usual round of the house as the afternoon ripened into
evening. I had a drink. And another. And  yet  another.  Gin  and  pineapple
juice,  my  favorite  mixture,  always  double  my energy. I decided to busy
myself with our unkempt lawn. Une petite attention.  It  was  crowded
with  dandelions,  and  a  cursed  dog--I  loathe dogs--had defiled the flat
stones where a sundial had once stood. Most of the  dandelions  had  changed
from suns to moons. The gin and Lolita were dancing in me, and I almost fell
over  the  folding  chairs that I attempted to dislodge. Incarnadine zebras!
There are some eructations that sound like cheers--at least,  mine  did.  An
old fence at the back of the garden separated us from the neighbor's garbage
receptacles  and  lilacs; but there was nothing between the front end of our
lawn (where it sloped along one side of the house) and the street. Therefore
I was able to watch (with the smirk of one about to perform a  good  action)
for  the  return  of Charlotte: that tooth should be extracted at once. As I
lurched and lunged with the hand mower, bits of grass  optically  twittering
in  the low sun, I kept an eye on that section of suburban street. It curved
in from under an archway of huge shade trees, then  sped  towards  us  down,
down,  quite  sharply,  past  old  Miss  Opposite's  ivied  brick  house and
high-sloping lawn (much trimmer than ours) and disappeared  behind  our  own
front  porch which I could not see from where I happily belched and labored.
The dandelions perished. A reek of  sap  mingled  with  the  pineapple.  Two
little  girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically
followed of late (but who could replace my Lolita?) went toward  the  avenue
(from  which  our  Lawn  Street  cascaded), one pushing a bicycle, the other
feeding from a paper bag, both talking at the top  of  their  sunny  voices.
Leslie,  old  Miss  Opposite's  gardener  and  chauffeur, a very amiable and
athletic Negro, grinned at me from afar and shouted,  re-shouted,  commented
by  gesture,  that  I  was  mighty  energetic  today.  The  fool  dog of the
prosperous junk dealer next door ran after a blue car--not Charlotte's.  The
prettier  of  the  two  little  girls  (Mabel, I think), shorts, halter with
little to halt, bright hair--a nymphet, by Pan!--ran back  down  the  street
crumpling  her paper bag and was hidden from this Green Goat by the frontage
of Mr. And Mrs. Humbert's residence. A station wagon popped out of the leafy
shade of the avenue, dragging some of it on  its  roof  before  the  shadows
snapped,   and  swung  by  at  an  idiotic  pace,  the  sweatshirted  driver
roof-holding with his left hand and the  junkman's  dog  tearing  alongside.
There  was  a  smiling  pause--and  then,  with  a  flutter  in my breast, I
witnessed the return of  the  Blue  Sedan.  I  saw  it  glide  downhill  and
disappear  behind  the corner of the house. I had a glimpse of her calm pale
profile. It occurred to me that until she went upstairs she would  not  know
whether  I  had  gone  or  not.  A minute later, with an expression of great
anguish on her face, she looked down at me from the window of Lo's room.  By
sprinting upstairs, I managed to reach that room before she left it.

When  the bride is a window and the groom is a widower; when the former
has lived in Our Great Little Town for hardly two years, and the latter  for
hardly  a month; when Monsieur wants to get the whole damned thing over with
as quickly as possible, and Madame gives in with a tolerant smile; then,  my
reader,  the  wedding  is generally a "quiet" affair. The bride may dispense
with a tiara of orange blossoms securing her finger-tip veil, nor  does  she
carry  a  white  orchid  in a prayer book. The bride's little daughter might
have added to the ceremonies uniting H. and H. a touch of vivid vermeil; but
I knew I would not  dare  be  too  tender  with  cornered  Lolita  yet,  and
therefore  agreed  it  was  not  worth while tearing the child away from her
beloved Camp Q.
     My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte  was  in  everyday
life matter-of-fact and gregarious. Moreover, I discovered that although she
could  not  control  her  heart  or her cries, she was a woman of principle.
Immediately after she had become more  or  less  my  mistress  (despite  the
stimulants,  her  "nervous,  eager chиri--a heroic chиri!--had
some initial trouble, for which, however, he  amply  compensated  her  by  a
fantastic  display  of old-world endearments), good Charlotte interviewed me
about my relations with God. I could have answered that  on  that  score  my
mind was open; I said, instead--paying my tribute to a pious platitude--that
I  believed  in  a  cosmic spirit. Looking down at her fingernails, she also
asked me had I not in my family a certain strange  strain.  I  countered  by
inquiring  whether  she would still want to marry me if my father's maternal
grandfather had been, say, a Turk. She said it did not  matter  a  bit;  but
that,  if  she  ever  found  out I did not believe in Our Christian God, she
would commit suicide. She said it so solemnly that it gave me the creeps. It
was then I knew she was a woman of principle.
     Oh, she was very genteel: she said "excuse me" whenever a  slight  burp
interrupted  her  flowing speech, called an envelope and ahnvelope, and when
talking to her lady-friends referred to me as  Mr.  Humbert.  I  thought  it
would  please her if I entered the community trailing some glamour after me.
On the day of our wedding a little interview with me appeared in the Society
Column of the Ramsdale Journal, with a photograph of  Charlotte,  one
eyebrow  up and a misprint in her name ("Hazer"). Despite this contretempts,
the publicity warmed the porcelain cockles of her heart--and made my rattles
shake with awful glee. by engaging in church work as well as by  getting  to
know  the  better  mothers  of  Lo's schoolmates, Charlotte in the course of
twenty months or so had managed to become if not a prominent,  at  least  an
acceptable  citizen,  but  never  before  had  she come under that thrilling
rubrique, and it was I who put her there, Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert  (I
threw  in  the  "Edgar"  just  for  the  heck of it), "writer and explorer."
McCoo's brother, when taking it down, asked me what I had written.  Whatever
I  told him came out as "several books on Peacock, Rainbow and other poets."
It was also noted that Charlotte and I had  known  each  other  for  several
years and that I was a distant relation of her first husband. I hinted I had
had  an  affair  with  her  thirteen years ago but this was not mentioned in
print. To Charlotte I said that  society  columns  should  contain  a
shimmer of errors.
     Let  us  go  on  with  this  curious tale. When called upon to enjoy my
promotion from lodger  to  lover,  did  I  experience  only  bitterness  and
distaste?  No. Mr. Humbert confesses to a certain titillation of his vanity,
to some faint tenderness, even to a  pattern  of  remorse  daintily  running
along  the  steel of his conspiratorial dagger. Never had I thought that the
rather ridiculous, through rather handsome Mrs. Haze, with her  blind  faith
in  the wisdom of her church and book club, her mannerisms of elocution, her
harsh, cold, contemptuous attitude toward an adorable, downy-armed child  of
twelve, could turn into such a touching, helpless creature as soon as I laid
my  hands  upon her which happened on the threshold of Lolita's room whither
she tremulously backed repeating "no, no, please no."
     The transformation improved her looks. Her smile that had been  such  a
contrived  thing,  thenceforth  became  the  radiance  of utter adoration--a
radiance having something soft and moist about it, in which, with wonder,  I
recognized  a  resemblance  to the lovely, inane, lost look that Lo had when
gloating over a new kind of  concoction  at  the  soda  fountain  or  mutely
admiring  my  expensive,  always  tailor-fresh clothes. Deeply fascinated, I
would watch Charlotte while she swapped parental woes with some  other  lady
and  made  that  national  grimace of feminine resignation (eyes rolling up,
mouth drooping sideways) which, in an infantile form, I had seen  Lo  making
herself.  We  had  highballs before turning in, and with their help, I would
manage to evoke the child while caressing the mother.  This  was  the  white
stomach  within which my nymphet had been a little curved fish in 1934. This
carefully dyed hair, so sterile to my sense of smell and touch, acquired  at
certain  lamplit moments in the poster bed the tinge, if not the texture, of
Lolita's  curls.  I  kept  telling  myself,  as  I  wielded   my   brand-new
large-as-life  wife,  that  biologically this was the nearest I could get to
Lolita; that at Lolita's age, Lotte had been as desirable  a  schoolgirl  as
her  daughter was, and as Lolita's daughter would be some day. I had my wife
unearth from under a collection of shoes (Mr. Haze had a passion  for  them,
it  appears)  a  thirty-year-old  album,  so  that I might see how Lotte had
looked as a child; and even though the  light  was  wrong  and  the  dresses
graceless,  I  was able to make out a dim first version of Lolita's outline,
legs, cheekbones, bobbed nose. Lottelita, Lolitchen.
     So I tom-peeped across the hedges of years, into  wan  little  windows.
And  when, by means of pitifully ardent, naively lascivious caresses, she of
the noble nipple and massive thigh prepared me for  the  performance  of  my
nightly duty, it was still a nymphet's scent that in despair I tried to pick
up, as I bayed through the undergrowth of dark decaying forests.
     I  simply  can't tell you how gentle, how touching my poor wife was. At
breakfast, in the depressingly bright kitchen, with its chrome  glitter  and
Hardware  and  Co.  Calendar and cute breakfast nook (simulating that Coffee
Shoppe where in their  college  days  Charlotte  and  Humbert  used  to  coo
together),  she  would  sit,  robed  in red, her elbow on the plastic-topped
table, her cheek propped on her fist,  and  stare  at  me  with  intolerable
tenderness  as  I consumed my ham and eggs. Humbert's face might twitch with
neuralgia, but in her eyes it vied in beauty and animation with the sun  and
shadows of leaves rippling on the white refrigerator. My solemn exasperation
was  to  her  the silence of love. My small income added to her even smaller
one impressed her as a brilliant fortune; not because the resulting sum  now
sufficed for most middle-class needs, but because even my money shone in her
eyes with the magic of my manliness, and she saw our joint account as one of
those  southern  boulevards  at midday that have solid shade on one side and
smooth sunshine on the other, all the way to the end of  a  prospect,  where
pink mountains loom.
     Into   the  fifty  days  of  our  cohabitation  Charlotte  crammed  the
activities of as many years. The poor woman busied herself with a number  of
things she had foregone long before or had never been much interested in, as
if (to prolong these Proustian intonations) by my marrying the mother of the
child  I  loved  I  had  enabled  my wife to regain an abundance of youth by
proxy. With the zest of a banal young bride, she  started  to  "glorify  the
home."  Knowing  as  I  did its every cranny by heart--since those days when
from my chair I mentally mapped out Lolita's course through the house--I had
long entered into a sort of emotional relationship with it,  with  its  very
ugliness  and  dirt, and now I could almost feel the wretched thing cower in
its reluctance to endure the bath of ecru and ocher and  putt-buff-and-snuff
that  Charlotte planned to give it. She never got as far as that, thank God,
but she did use up a tremendous amount of energy in washing  window  shades,
waxing  the  slats of Venetian blinds, purchasing new shades and new blinds,
returning them to the store, replacing them by  others,  and  so  on,  in  a
constant  chiaroscuro of smiles and frowns, doubts and pouts. She dabbled in
cretonnes and chintzes; she changed the colors of the sofa--the sacred  sofa
where  a  bubble  of  paradise  had once burst in slow motion within me. She
rearranged the furniture--and was pleased when she  found,  in  a  household
treatise,  that  "it  is permissible to separate a pair of sofa commodes and
their companion lamps." With the authoress of Your Home Is  You,  she
developed  a  hatred for little lean chairs and spindle tables. She believed
that a room having a generous expanse  of  glass,  and  lots  of  rich  wood
paneling  was an example of the masculine type of room, whereas the feminine
type was characterized by lighter-looking windows and frailer woodwork.  The
novels  I  had  found  her  reading  when  I  moved  in were now replaced by
illustrated catalogues and homemaking guides. From a firm  located  at  4640
Roosevelt  Blvd.,  Philadelphia,  she  ordered  for our double bed a "damask
covered 312 coil mattress"--although the old one seemed to me resilient  and
durable enough for whatever it had to support.
     A Midwesterner, as her late husband had also been, she had lived in coy
Ramsdale,  the gem of an eastern state, not long enough to know all the nice
people. She knew slightly  the  jovial  dentist  who  lived  in  a  kind  of
ramshackle  wooden  chateau behind our lawn. She had met at a church tea the
"snooty" wife of the local junk dealer who owned the "colonial" white horror
at the corner of the avenue. Now  and  then  she  "visited  with"  old  Miss
Opposite; but the more patrician matrons among those she called upon, or met
at  lawn  functions, or had telephone chats with--such dainty ladies as Mrs.
Glave, Mrs. Sheridan, Mrs. McCrystal, Mrs. Knight and others, seldom  seemed
to call on my neglected Charlotte. Indeed, the only couple with whom she had
relations  of  real  cordiality,  devoid  of  any  arriхre-pensиe  or
practical foresight, were the Farlows who had just come back from a business
trip to Chile in time to attend our wedding, with  the  Chatfields,  McCoos,
and  a  few others (but not Mrs. Junk or the even prouder Mrs. Talbot). John
Farlow was a middle-aged, quiet, quietly athletic, quietly successful dealer
in sporting goods, who had an office at Parkington, forty miles away: it was
he who got me the cartridges for that Colt and showed  me  how  to  use  it,
during  a  walk  in  the woods one Sunday; he was also what he called with a
smile a part-time lawyer and had handled some of Charlotte's affairs.  Jean,
his  youngish  wife  (and first cousin), was a long-limbed girl in harlequin
glasses with two boxer dogs, two pointed breasts and a big  red  mouth.  She
painted--landscapes  and portraits--and vividly do I remember praising, over
cocktails, the picture she had made of a  niece  of  hers,  little  Rosaline
Honeck,  a  rosy honey in a Girl Scout uniform, beret of green worsted, belt
of green webbing, charming shoulder-long curls--and John  removed  his  pipe
and  said  it  was a pity Dolly (my Dolita) and Rosaline were so critical of
each other at school, but he hoped, and we all  hoped,  they  would  get  on
better  when  they  returned  from  their respective camps. We talked of the
school. It had its drawbacks, and it had its virtues. "Of course,  too  many
of the tradespeople here are Italians," said John, "but on the other hand we
are  still  spared--"  "I  wish,"  interrupted Jean with a laugh, "Dolly and
Rosaline  were  spending  the  summer  together."  Suddenly  I  imagined  Lo
returning  from  camp--brown,  warm,  drowsy, drugged--and was ready to weep
with passion and impatience.

A few words more about Mrs. Humbert while the  going  is  good  (a  bad
accident is to happen quite soon). I had been always aware of the possessive
streak  in  her,  but  I  never  thought  she would be so crazily jealous of
anything in my life that had not been she. She showed  a  fierce  insatiable
curiosity  for  my  past. She desired me to resuscitate all my loves so that
she might make me insult them,  and  trample  upon  them,  and  revoke  them
apostately  and totally, thus destroying my past. She made me tell her about
my marriage to Valeria, who was of course  a  scream;  but  I  also  had  to
invent,  or  to pad atrociously, a long series of mistresses for Charlotte's
morbid delectation. To keep  her  happy,  I  had  to  present  her  with  an
illustrated  catalogue  of them, all nicely differentiated, according to the
rules of those American ads where schoolchildren are pictured  in  a  subtle
ratio   of   races,   with   one--only   one,  but  as  cute  as  they  make
them--chocolate-colored round-eyed little lad, almost in the very middle  of
the  front  row.  So  I presented my women, and had them smile and sway--the
languorous blond, the fiery  brunette,  the  sensual  copperhead--as  if  on
parade  in  a  bordello. The more popular and platitudinous I made them, the
more Mrs. Humbert was pleased with the show.
     Never in  my  life  had  I  confessed  so  much  or  received  so  many
confessions. The sincerity and artlessness with which she discussed what she
called  her "love-life," from first necking to connubial catch-as-catch-can,
were, ethically,  in  striking  contrast  with  my  glib  compositions,  but
technically  the  two  sets  were congeneric since both were affected by the
same stuff (soap operas, psychoanalysis and cheap novelettes) upon  which  I
drew  for  my  characters  and  she  for  her  mode  of  expression.  I  was
considerably amused by certain remarkable sexual habits that the good Harold
Haze had had according to Charlotte  who  thought  my  mirth  improper;  but
otherwise  her autobiography was as devoid of interests as her autopsy would
have been. I never saw a healthier woman than she, despite thinning diets.
     Of my Lolita she seldom spoke--more seldom, in fact, than  she  did  of
the blurred, blond male baby whose photograph to the exclusion of all others
adorned  our bleak bedroom. In once of her tasteless reveries, she predicted
that the dead infant's soul would return to earth in the form of  the  child
she  would  bear in her present wedlock. And although I felt no special urge
to supply the Humbert line with a replica of  Harold's  production  (Lolita,
with  an  incestuous  thrill,  I had grown to regard as my child), it
occurred to me that a prolonged confinement, with a nice Cesarean  operation
and other complications in a safe maternity ward sometime next spring, would
give  me  a  chance to be alone with my Lolita for weeks, perhaps--and gorge
the limp nymphet with sleeping pills.
     Oh, she simply hated her daughter! What I  thought  especially  vicious
was  that  she  had  gone  out of her way to answer with great diligence the
questionnaires in a  fool's  book  she  had  (A  guide  to  Your  Child's
Development), published in Chicago. The rigmarole went year by year, and
Mom  was  supposed  to  fill  out a kind of inventory at each of her child's
birthdays. On Lo's twelfth, January 1, 1947, Charlotte Haze, nиe Becker, had
underlined the following epithets, ten out of  forty,  under  "Your  Child's
Personality":  aggressive,  boisterous,  critical,  distrustful,  impatient,
irritable,  inquisitive,  listless,  negativistic  (underlined  twice)   and
obstinate. She had ignored the thirty remaining adjectives, among which were
cheerful,  co-operative,  energetic,  and so forth. It was really maddening.
With a brutality that otherwise never appeared  in  my  loving  wife's  mild
nature,  she  attacked  and  routed  such of Lo's little belongings that had
wandered to various parts  of  the  house  to  freeze  there  like  so  many
hypnotized  bunnies. Little did the good lady dream that one morning when an
upset stomach (the result of  my  trying  to  improve  on  her  sauces)  had
prevented  me  from  accompanying  her to church, I deceived her with one of
Lolita's anklets. And  then,  her  attitude  toward  my  saporous  darling's
letters!

     "Dear Mummy and Hummy,
     Hope  you  are  fine. Thank you very much for the candy. I [crossed out
and re-written again] I lost my new sweater in the woods. It has  been  cold
here for the last few days. I'm having a time. Love,
     Dolly."

     "The  dumb  child,"  said  Mrs.  Humbert,  "has  left out a word before
'time.' That sweater was all-wool, and I wish you would not send  her  candy
without consulting me."

There  was  a  woodlake  (Hourglass  Lake--not  as I had thought it was
spelled) a few miles from Ramsdale, and there was one week of great heat  at
the  end  of July when we drove there daily. I am now obliged to describe in
some tedious detail our last  swim  there  together,  one  tropical  Tuesday
morning.
     We  had  left  the car in a parking area not far from the road and were
making our way down a path cut through the pine forest  to  the  lake,  when
Charlotte  remarked  that  Jean Farlow, in quest of rare light effects (Jean
belonged to the old school of painting), had seen Leslie taking  a  dip  "in
the ebony" (as John had quipped) at five o'clock in the morning last Sunday.
     "The water," I said, "must have been quite cold."
     "That  is  not  the  point,"  said  the  logical  doomed  dear.  "He is
subnormal, you see. And," she continued (in that carefully  phrased  way  of
hers  that  was  beginning  to  tell  on my health), "I have a very definite
feeling our Louise is in love with that moron."
     Feeling. "We feel Dolly is not doing as well" etc. (from an old  school
report).
     The Humberts walked on, sandaled and robed.
     "Do  you  know,  Hum: I have one most ambitious dream," pronounced Lady
Hum, lowering her head--shy of that  dream--and  communing  with  the  tawny
ground.  "I  would love to get hold of a real trained servant maid like that
German girl the Talbots spoke of; and have her live in the house."
     "No room," I said.
     "Come," she said with her quizzical smile, "surely,  chиri,  you
underestimate  the  possibilities  of  the Humbert home. We would put her in
Lo's room. I intended to make a guestroom of  that  hole  anyway.  It's  the
coldest and meanest in the whole house."
     "What  are  you  talking  about?"  I  asked,  the skin of my cheekbones
tensing up (this I take the trouble to note only because my daughter's  skin
did the same when she felt that way: disbelief, disgust, irritation).
     "Are  you  bothered  by  Romantic  Associations?"  queried  my wife--in
allusion to her first surrender.
     "Hell no," said I. "I just wonder where will you put your daughter when
you get your guest or your maid."
     "Ah," said Mrs.  Humbert,  dreaming,  smiling,  drawing  out  the  "Ah"
simultaneously  with  the  raise  of  one  eyebrow  and a soft exhalation of
breath. "Little Lo, I'm afraid, does not enter the picture at all,  at  all.
Little  Lo  goes  straight  from  camp to a good boarding school with strict
discipline and some sound religious training. And then--Beardsley College. I
have it all mapped out, you need not worry."
     She went on to say that she, Mrs. Humbert, would have to  overcome  her
habitual  sloth and write to Miss Phalli's sister who taught at St. Algebra.
The dazzling lake emerged. I said I had forgotten my sunglasses in  the  car
and would catch up with her.
     I  had  always  thought  that  wringing  one's  hands  was  a fictional
gesture--the obscure outcome, perhaps, of some medieval  ritual;  but  as  I
took to the woods, for a spell of despair and desperate meditation, this was
the gesture ("look, Lord, at these chains!") that would have come nearest to
the mute expression of my mood.
     Had  Charlotte  been  Valeria,  I  would  have  known how to handle the
situation; and "handle" is the word I want. In the good old days, by  merely
twisting  fat  Valechka's  brittle wrist (the one she had fallen upon from a
bicycle) I could make her change her mind instantly;  but  anything  of  the
sort  in  regard  to  Charlotte  was  unthinkable.  Bland American Charlotte
frightened me. My lighthearted dream of controlling her through her  passion
for  me  was all wrong. I dared not do anything to spoil the image of me she
had set up to adore. I had toadied to her when she was the awesome duenna of
my darling, and a groveling something still persisted in my attitude  toward
her.  The only ace I held was her ignorance of my monstrous love for her Lo.
She had been annoyed by Lo's liking me; but my feelings she could not
divine. To Valeria I might have said: "Look here, you fat fool, c'est moi
qui dиcide what is good for Dolores Humbert." To Charlotte, I could  not
even  say  (with ingratiating calm): "Excuse me, my dear, I disagree. Let us
give the child one more chance. Let me be her private tutor for  a  year  or
so. You once told me yourself--" In fact, I could not say anything at all to
Charlotte about the child without giving myself away. Oh, you cannot imagine
(as  I had never imagined) what these women of principle are! Charlotte, who
did not notice the falsity of all the  everyday  conventions  and  rules  of
behavior, and foods, and books, and people she doted upon, would distinguish
at once a false intonation in anything I might say with a view to keeping Lo
near.  She  was  like  a musician who may be an odious vulgarian in ordinary
life, devoid of tact and taste; but who will hear a false note in music with
diabolical accuracy of judgment. To break Charlotte's will, I would have  to
break her heart. If I broke her heart, her image of me would break too. If I
said:  "Either I have my way with Lolita, and you help me to keep the matter
quiet, or we part at once," she would have turned as  pale  as  a  woman  of
clouded  glass  and slowly replied: "All right, whatever you add or retract,
this is the end." And the end it would be.
     Such, then, was the mess. I remember  reaching  the  parking  area  and
pumping  a handful of rust-tasting water, and drinking it as avidly as if it
would give me magic wisdom, youth, freedom, a tiny concubine. For  a  while,
purple-robed,  heel-dangling,  I  sat on the edge of one of the rude tables,
under the whooshing pines. In the middle distance,  two  little  maidens  in
shorts  and  halters  came  out  of  a  sun-dappled  privy  marked  "Women."
Gum-chewing  Mabel  (or  Mabel's  understudy)  laboriously,   absentmindedly
straddled  a  bicycle,  and  Marion,  shaking her hair because of the flies,
settled behind, legs wide apart; and wobbling, they slowly, absently, merged
with the light and shade. Lolita! Father and  daughter  melting  into  these
woods! The natural solution was to destroy Mrs. Humbert. But how?
     No  man can bring about the perfect murder; chance, however, can do it.
There was the famous dispatch of a Mme Lacour in Arles, southern France,  at
the  close  of last century. An unidentified bearded six-footer, who, it was
later conjectured, had been the lady's secret lover, walked up to her  in  a
crowded  street,  soon  after  her  marriage to Colonel Lacour, and mortally
stabbed her in the back, three times, while the Colonel, a small bulldog  of
a  man,  hung  onto  the  murderer's  arm.  By  a  miraculous  and beautiful
coincidence, right at the moment  when  the  operator  was  in  the  act  of
loosening  the  angry  little  husband's  jaws (while several onlookers were
closing in upon the group), a cranky Italian in the  house  nearest  to  the
scene  set  off  by  sheer  accident some kind of explosive he was tinkering
with, and immediately the street was turned into  a  pandemonium  of  smoke,
falling bricks and running people. The explosion hurt no one (except that it
knocked out game Colonel Lacour); but the lady's vengeful lover ran when the
others ran--and lived happily ever after.
     Now  look  what  happens  when  the  operator  himself  plans a perfect
removal.
     I walked down to Hourglass Lake. The spot from which we and a few other
"nice" couples (the Farlows, the Chatfields) bathed  was  a  kind  of  small
cove;  my  Charlotte  liked  it because it was almost "a private beach." The
main  bathing  facilities  (or  drowning   facilities"   as   the   Ramsdale
Journal  had  had occasion to say) were in the left (eastern) part of
the hourglass, and could not be seen from our covelet.  To  our  right,  the
pines  soon  gave way to a curve of marshland which turned again into forest
on the opposite side.
     I sat down beside my wife so noiselessly that she started.
     "Shall we go in?" she asked.
     "We shall in a minute. Let me follow a train of thought."
     I thought. More than a minute passed.
     "All right. Come on."
     "Was I on that train?"
     "You certainly were."
     "I hope so," said Charlotte entering the water.  It  soon  reached  the
gooseflesh  of  her  thick thighs; and then, joining her outstretched hands,
shutting her mouth tight, very plain-faced in  her  black  rubber  headgear,
charlotte flung herself forward with a great splash.
     Slowly we swam out into the shimmer of the lake.
     On  the opposite bank, at least a thousand paces away (if one cold walk
across water), I could make out the tiny figures of  two  men  working  like
beavers  on  their stretch of shore. I knew exactly who they were: a retired
policeman of Polish descent and the retired plumber who owned  most  of  the
timber  on  that  side  of  the  lake.  And I also knew they were engaged in
building, just for the dismal fun of the thing, a  wharf.  The  knocks  that
reached  us  seemed so much bigger than what could be distinguished of those
dwarfs' arms  and  tools;  indeed,  one  suspected  the  director  of  those
acrosonic  effects  to  have been at odds with the puppet-master, especially
since the hefty crack of each  diminutive  blow  lagged  behind  its  visual
version.
     The  short  white-sand  strip  of "our" beach--from which by now we had
gone a little way to reach deep water--was empty on weekday mornings.  There
was  nobody  around  except those two tiny very busy figures on the opposite
side,  and  a  dark-red  private  plane  that  droned  overhead,  and   then
disappeared in the blue. The setting was really perfect for a brisk bubbling
murder,  and  here was the subtle point: the man of law and the man of water
were just near enough to witness an accident and  just  far  enough  not  to
observe a crime. They were near enough to hear a distracted bather thrashing
about  and  bellowing  for  somebody  to come and help him save his drowning
wife; and they were too far to distinguish (if they  happened  to  look  too
soon)  that  the  anything but distracted swimmer was finishing to tread his
wife underfoot. I was not yet at that stage; I merely  want  to  convey  the
ease  of the act, the nicety of the setting! So there was Charlotte swimming
on with dutiful awkwardness (she was  a  very  mediocre  mermaid),  but  not
without a certain solemn pleasure (for was not her merman by her side?); and
as  I  watched,  with  the  stark  lucidity  of  a  future recollection (you
know--trying to see things as you  will  remember  having  seen  them),  the
glossy whiteness of her wet face so little tanned despite all her endeavors,
and  her  pale lips, and her naked convex forehead, and the tight black cap,
and the plump wet neck, I knew that all I had to do was to drop back, take a
deep breath, then grab her by the ankle and rapidly  dive  with  my  captive
corpse.  I  say  corpse because surprise, panic and inexperience would cause
her to inhale at once a lethal gallon of lake, while I would be able to hold
on for at least a full minute, open-eyed  under  water.  The  fatal  gesture
passed  like  the  tail  of  a  falling  star  across  the  blackness of the
contemplated crime. It was like some dreadful silent ballet, the male dancer
holding the  ballerina  by  her  foot  and  streaking  down  through  watery
twilight.  I  might  come  up  for a mouthful of air while still holding her
down, and then would dive again as many times as  would  be  necessary,  and
only  when  the  curtain came down on her for good, would I permit myself to
yell for help. And when some twenty minutes later the two  puppets  steadily
growing  arrived  in  a  rowboat,  one half newly painted, poor Mrs. Humbert
Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both,  would  be
standing  on  her  head in the inky ooze, some thirty feet below the smiling
surface of Hourglass Lake.
     Simple, was it not? But what d'ye know, folks--I just  could  not  make
myself do it!
     She  swam  beside  me, a trustful and clumsy seal, and all the logic of
passion screamed in my ear: Now is the time! And, folks, I just couldn't! In
silence I turned shoreward and gravely,  dutifully,  she  also  turned,  and
still hell screamed its counsel, and still I could not make myself drown the
poor, slippery, big-bodied creature. The scream grew more and more remote as
I  realized  the  melancholy fact that neither tomorrow, nor Friday, nor any
other day or night, could I make myself  put  her  to  death.  Oh,  I  could
visualize  myself  slapping Valeria's breasts out of alignment, or otherwise
hurting her--and I could see myself, no less clearly, shooting her lover  in
the  underbelly and making him say "akh!" and sit down. But I could not kill
Charlotte--especially when things were on the whole not quite  as  hopeless,
perhaps,  as they seemed at first wince on that miserable morning. Were I to
catch her by her strong kicking foot; were I to see her  amazed  look,  hear
her awful voice; were I still to go through with the ordeal, her ghost would
haunt  me all my life. Perhaps if the year were 1447 instead of 1947 I might
have hoodwinked my gentle nature by administering her some classical  poison
from  a  hollow agate, some tender philter of death. But in our middle-class
nosy era it would not have come off the way  it  used  to  in  the  brocaded
palaces of the past. Nowadays you have to be a scientist if you want to be a
killer.  No,  no,  I  was  neither.  Ladies  and  gentlemen of the jury, the
majority of sex offenders that hanker  for  some  throbbing,  sweet-moaning,
physical  but  not  necessarily  coital,  relation  with  a  girl-child, are
innocuous, inadequate, passive, timid strangers who merely ask the community
to allow them to  pursue  their  practically  harmless,  so-called  aberrant
behavior,  their little hot wet private acts of sexual deviation without the
police and society cracking down upon them. We are not sex fiends! We do not
rape as  good  soldiers  do.  We  are  unhappy,  mild,  dog-eyed  gentlemen,
sufficiently  well integrated to control our urge in the presence of adults,
but ready to give years and years of life for one chance to touch a nymphet.
Emphatically, no killers are we. Poets never kill. Oh, my poor Charlotte, do
not hate me in your eternal heaven among an eternal alchemy of  asphalt  and
rubber and metal and stone--but thank God, not water, not water!
     Nonetheless  it was a very close shave, speaking quite objectively. And
now comes the point of my perfect-crime parable.
     We sat down on our towels  in  the  thirsty  sun.  She  looked  around,
loosened  her  bra, and turned over on her stomach to give her back a chance
to be feasted upon. She said she loved me. She sighed deeply.  She  extended
one  arm and groped in the pocket of her robe for her cigarettes. She sat up
and smoked. She examined her right shoulder. She kissed me heavily with open
smoky mouth. Suddenly, down the sand bank behind us, from under  the  bushes
and pines, a stone rolled, then another.
     "Those  disgusting prying kids," said Charlotte, holding up her big bra
to her breast and turning prone again. "I shall have to speak about that  to
Peter Krestovski."
     From  the  debouchment of the trail came a rustle, a footfall, and Jean
Farlow marched down with her easel and things.
     "You scared us," said Charlotte.
     Jean said she had been up there,  in  a  place  of  green  concealment,
spying  on  nature (spies are generally shot), trying to finish a lakescape,
but it was no good, she had no talent whatever (which was quite  true)--"And
have  you  ever tried painting, Humbert?" Charlotte, who was a little
jealous of Jean, wanted to know if John was coming.
     He was. He was coming home for lunch today. He had dropped her  on  the
way  to Parkington and should be picking her up any time now. It was a grand
morning. She always felt a traitor to Cavall and Melampus for  leaving  them
roped  on  such  gorgeous  days.  She  sat  down  on  the white sand between
Charlotte and me. She wore  shorts.  Her  long  brown  legs  were  about  as
attractive  to  me as those of a chestnut mare. She showed her gums when she
smiled.
     "I almost put both of you into my lake,"  she  said.  "I  even  noticed
something  you  overlooked. You [addressing Humbert] had your wrist watch on
in, yes, sir, you had."
     "Waterproof," said Charlotte softly, making a fish mouth.
     Jean took my wrist upon her knee and examined  Charlotte's  gift,  then
put back Humbert's hand on the sand, palm up.
     "You could see anything that way," remarked Charlotte coquettishly.
     Jean sighed. "I once saw," she said, "two children, male and female, at
sunset,  right  here, making love. Their shadows were giants. And I told you
about Mr. Tomson at daybreak. Next time I expect to see fat old Ivor in  the
ivory.  He  is  really  a freak, that man. Last time he told me a completely
indecent story about his nephew. It appears--"
     "Hullo there," said John's voice.

My habit of being silent when displeased or, more exactly, the cold and
scaly quality of my displeased silence, used to frighten Valeria out of  her
wits.  She  used to whimper and wail, saying "Ce qui me rend folle, c'est
que je ne sais ю quoi tu penses quand tu es comme  гa."  I  tried  being
silent  with Charlotte--and she just chirped on, or chucked my silence under
the chin. An astonishing woman! I would retire to  my  former  room,  now  a
regular  "studio,"  mumbling  I  had  after all a learned opus to write, and
cheerfully Charlotte went on beautifying the home, warbling on the telephone
and writing letters. From my window, through the lacquered shiver of  poplar
leaves,  I  could  see  her  crossing the street and contentedly mailing her
letter to Miss Phalen's sister.
     The week of scattered showers and shadows which elapsed after our  last
visit  to  the motionless sands of Hourglass Lake was one of the gloomiest I
can recall. Then came two or three dim rays  of  hope--before  the  ultimate
sunburst.
     It  occurred  to  me that I had a fine brain in beautiful working order
and that I might as well use it. If I dared not meddle with my wife's  plans
for  her  daughter (getting warmer and browner every day in the fair weather
of hopeless distance), I could surely devise some general  means  to  assert
myself  in  a  general  way that might be later directed toward a particular
occasion. One evening, Charlotte herself provided me with an opening.
     "I have a surprise for you," she said looking at me with fond eyes over
a spoonful of soup. "In the fall we two are going to England."
     I swallowed my spoonful, wiped my lips with pink paper (Oh,  the
cool rich linens of Mirana Hotel!) and said:
     "I  have  also  a  surprise  for  you, my dear. We two are not going to
England."
     "Why, what's the matter?" she said, looking--with more surprise than  I
had  counted  upon--at my hands (I was involuntarily folding and tearing and
crushing and tearing again the innocent pink napkin). My  smiling  face  set
her somewhat at ease, however.
     "The  matter  is quite simple," I replied. "Even in the most harmonious
of households, as ours is,  not  all  decisions  are  taken  by  the  female
partner. There are certain things that the husband is there to decide. I can
well imagine the thrill that you, a healthy American gal, must experience at
crossing  the  Atlantic  on  the  same  ocean liner with Lady Bumble--or Sam
Bumble, the Frozen Meat King, or a Hollywood harlot. And I  doubt  not  that
you  and  I  would  make a pretty ad for the Traveling Agency when portrayed
looking--you, frankly starry-eyed, I, controlling my envious  admiration--at
the  Palace  Sentries, or Scarlet Guards, or Beaver Eaters, or whatever they
are called. But I happen to be  allergic  to  Europe,  including  merry  old
England. As you well know, I have nothing but very sad associations with the
Old  and  rotting  World.  No  colored ads in your magazines will change the
situation."
     "My darling," said Charlotte. "I really--"
     "No, wait a minute.  The  present  matter  is  only  incidental.  I  am
concerned  with  a  general trend. When you wanted me to spend my afternoons
sunbathing on the Lake instead of doing my work, I gladly gave in and became
a bronzed glamour boy for your sake, instead of  remaining  a  scholar  and,
well,  an educator. When you lead me to bridge and bourbon with the charming
Farlows, I meekly follow. No, please, wait. When you decorate your  home,  I
do  not  interfere  with  your schemes. When you decide--when you decide all
kinds of matters, I  may  be  in  complete,  or  in  partial,  let  us  say,
disagreement--but  I  say  nothing. I ignore the particular. I cannot ignore
the general. I love being bossed by you, but every game has its rules. I  am
not  cross.  I am not cross at all. Don't do that. But I am one half of this
household, and have a small but distinct voice."
     She had come to my side and had fallen on her knees and was slowly, but
very vehemently, shaking her head and clawing at my trousers. She  said  she
had  never  realized.  She said I was her ruler and her god. She said Louise
had gone, and let us make love right away. She said I must  forgive  her  or
she would die.
     This  little  incident  filled me with considerable elation. I told her
quietly that it was a matter not of  asking  forgiveness,  but  of  changing
one's  ways;  and  I resolved to press my advantage and spend a good deal of
time, aloof and moody, working at my book--or at least pretending to work.
     The "studio bed" in my former room had long  been  converted  into  the
sofa it had always been at heart, and Charlotte had warned me since the very
beginning of our cohabitation that gradually the room would be turned into a
regular  "writer's  den." A couple of days after the British Incident, I was
sitting in a new and very comfortable easy chair, with a large volume in  my
lap,  when  Charlotte  rapped  with  her  ring  finger and sauntered in. How
different were her movements from those of my Lolita, when  she  used
to  visit  me  in  her  dear  dirty  blue  jeans,  smelling  of  orchards in
nymphetland; awkward and fey, and dimly depraved, the lower buttons  of  her
shirt  unfastened. Let me tell you, however, something. Behind the brashness
of little Haze, and the poise of big Haze, a trickle of shy  life  ran  that
tasted  the same, that murmured the same. A great French doctor once told my
father that in near relatives the  faintest  gastric  gurgle  has  the  same
"voice."
     So  Charlotte sauntered in. She felt all was not well between us. I had
pretended to fall asleep the night before, and the  night  before  that,  as
soon as we had gone to bed, and had risen at dawn.
     Tenderly, she inquired if she were not "interrupting."
     "Not  at  the  moment,"  I  said,  turning  volume  C  of the Girls'
Encyclopedia around  to  examine  a  picture  printed  "bottom-edge"  as
printers say.
     Charlotte  went  up  to  a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a
drawer. She put her hand upon it. The little table was ugly, no  doubt,  but
it had done nothing to her.
     "I  have  always  wanted  to  ask  you,"  she  said  (businesslike, not
coquettish), "why is this thing locked up? Do you want it in this room? It's
so abominably uncouth."
     "Leave it alone," I said. I was Camping in Scandinavia.
     "Is there a key?"
     "Hidden."
     "Oh, Hum . . . "
     "Locked up love letters."
     She gave me one of those wounded-doe looks that irritated me  so  much,
and  then,  not  quite  knowing  if  I  was  serious,  or how to keep up the
conversation, stood for several slow pages (Campus, Canada,  Candid  Camera,
Candy)  peering  at the window pane rather than through it, drumming upon it
with sharp almond-and-rose fingernails.
     Presently (at Canoeing or Canvasback) she strolled up to my  chair  and
sank  down,  tweedily, weightily, on its arm, inundating me with the perfume
my first wife  had  used.  "Would  his  lordship  like  to  spend  the  fall
here?"  she  asked, pointing with her little finger at an autumn view
in a conservative Eastern State. "Why?" (very distinctly  and  slowly).  She
shrugged.  (Probably  Harold  used  to  take  a  vacation at that time. Open
season. Conditional reflex on her part.)
     "I think I know where that is," she said, still pointing. "There  is  a
hotel  I  remember,  Enchanted  Hunters, quaint, isn't it? And the food is a
dream. And nobody bothers anybody."
     She rubbed her cheek against my temple. Valeria soon got over that.
     "Is there anything special you would like for dinner,  dear?  John  and
Jean will drop in later."
     I  answered  with  a grunt. She kissed me on my underlip, and, brightly
saying she would bake a cake (a tradition subsisted  from  my  lodging  days
that I adored her cakes), left me to my idleness.
     Carefully putting down the open book where she had sat (it attempted to
send forth a rotation of waves, but an inserted pencil stopped the pages), I
checked  the  hiding  place of the key: rather self-consciously it lay under
the old expensive safety razor I had used before she bought me a much better
and cheaper one. Was it the perfect hiding place--there, under the razor, in
the groove of its velvet-lined case? The case lay in a small trunk  where  I
kept  various  business  papers.  Could  I improve upon this? Remarkable how
difficult  it  is  to  conceal  things--especially  when  one's  wife  keeps
monkeying with the furniture.


I  think  it  was exactly a week after our last swim that the noon mail
brought a reply from the second Miss Phalen. The lady  wrote  she  had  just
returned  to St. Algebra from her sister's funeral. "Euphemia had never been
the same after breaking that hip."  As  to  the  matter  of  Mrs.  Humbert's
daughter, she wished to report that it was too late to enroll her this year;
but  that she, the surviving Phalen, was practically certain that if Mr. and
Mrs. Humbert brought Dolores  over  in  January,  her  admittance  might  be
arranged.
     Next  day,  after  lunch, I went to see "our" doctor, a friendly fellow
whose perfect bedside manner and complete reliance on a few  patented  drugs
adequately  masked  his  ignorance of, and indifference to, medical science.
The fact that Lo would have to come back  to  Ramsdale  was  a  treasure  of
anticipation.  For  this  event I wanted to be fully prepared. I had in fact
begun my campaign earlier, before Charlotte  made  that  cruel  decision  of
hers.  I  had  to be sure when my lovely child arrived, that very night, and
then night after night, until St. Algebra took her away  from  me,  I  would
possess  the  means  of  putting  two  creatures to sleep so thoroughly that
neither sound nor touch should rouse them. Throughout most  of  July  I  had
been  experimenting  with  various  sleeping  powders,  trying  them  out on
Charlotte, a great taker of pills. The  last  dose  I  had  given  her  (she
thought  it was a tablet of mild bromides--to anoint her nerves) had knocked
her out for four solid hours. I had put the  radio  at  full  blast.  I  had
blazed  in  her  face  an olisbos-like flashlight. I had pushed her, pinched
her, prodded her--and nothing had disturbed  the  rhythm  of  her  calm  and
powerful  breathing.  However,  when  I had done such a simple thing as kiss
her, she had awakened at once, as fresh and strong as an octopus  (I  barely
escaped). This would not do, I thought; had to get something still safer. At
first,  Dr.  Byron  did  not  seem  to  believe  me  when  I  said  his last
prescription was no match for my insomnia. He suggested I try again, and for
a moment diverted my attention by showing me photographs of his  family.  He
had  a  fascinating  child  of Dolly's age; but I saw through his tricks and
insisted he prescribe the mightiest pill extant. He suggested I  play  golf,
but  finally agreed to give me something that, he said, "would really work";
and going to a cabinet, he produced a vial of  violet-blue  capsules  banded
with  dark  purple  at  one end, which, he said, had just been placed on the
market and were intended not for neurotics whom a draft of water could  calm
if  properly  administered,  but only for great sleepless artists who had to
die for a few hours in order to live for centuries. I love to fool  doctors,
and  though  inwardly  rejoicing, pocketed the pills with a skeptical shrug.
Incidentally, I had had to be careful with him. Once, in another connection,
a stupid lapse on my part made me mention my last sanatorium, and I  thought
I  saw  the  tips of his ears twitch. Being not at all keen for Charlotte or
anybody else to know that period of my past, I had hastily explained that  I
had once done some research among the insane for a novel. But no matter; the
old rogue certainly had a sweet girleen.
     I  left  in  great  spirits.  Steering my wife's car with one finger, I
contentedly rolled homeward. Ramsdale had, after all,  lots  of  charm.  The
cicadas  whirred;  the  avenue  had  been  freshly watered. Smoothly, almost
silkily, I turned down into our steep little street. Everything was  somehow
so  right  that  day.  So  blue  and  green. I knew the sun shone because my
ignition key was reflected in the windshield; and I knew it was exactly half
past three because the  nurse  who  came  to  massage  Miss  Opposite  every
afternoon  was  tripping down the narrow sidewalk in her white stockings and
shoes. As usual, Junk's hysterical setter attacked me as I rolled  downhill,
and  as usual, the local paper was lying on the porch where it had just been
hurled by Kenny.
     The day before I had ended the regime of aloofness I had  imposed  upon
myself,  and  now uttered a cheerful homecoming call as I opened the door of
the living room. With her ream-white nape and bronze bun to me, wearing  the
yellow  blouse  and maroon slacks she had on when I first met her, Charlotte
sat at the corner bureau writing a letter. My hand still on the doorknob,  I
repeated  my  hearty  cry.  Her  writing  hand  stopped. She sat still for a
moment; then she slowly turned in her chair and  rested  her  elbow  on  its
curved  back. Her face, disfigured by her emotion, was not a pretty sight as
she stared at my legs and said:
     "The Haze woman, the big bitch,  the  old  cat,  the  obnoxious  mamma,
the--the old stupid Haze is no longer your dupe. She has--she has . . ."
     My  fair  accuser stopped, swallowing her venom and her tears. Whatever
Humbert Humbert said--or attempted to say--is inessential. She went on:
     "You're a monster. You're a detestable, abominable, criminal fraud.  If
you come near--I'll scream out the window. Get back!"
     Again, whatever H.H. murmured may be omitted, I think.
     "I  am leaving tonight. This is all yours. Only you'll never, never see
that miserable brat again. Get out of this room."
     Reader, I did. I went up to the ex-semi-studio. Arms  akimbo,  I  stood
for a moment quite still and self-composed, surveying from the threshold the
raped  little  table with its open drawer, a key hanging from the lock, four
other household keys on the table top. I walked across the landing into  the
Humberts' bedroom, and calmly removed my diary from under her pillow into my
pocket.  Then  I  started  to walk downstairs, but stopped half-way: she was
talking on the telephone which happened to be plugged just outside the  door
of  the  living  room. I wanted to hear what she was saying: she canceled an
order for something or other, and returned to the parlor.  I  rearranged  my
respiration  and  went through the hallway to the kitchen. There, I opened a
bottle of Scotch. She could never resist Scotch.  Then  I  walked  into  the
dining  room  and  from  there,  through  the  half-open  door, contemplated
Charlotte's broad back.
     "You are ruining my life  and  yours,"  I  said  quietly.  "Let  us  be
civilized  people.  It  is all your hallucination. You are crazy, Charlotte.
The notes you found were fragments of a novel. Your name and hers  were  put
in  by  mere  chance.  Just  because they came handy. Think it over. I shall
bring you a drink."
     She neither answered nor turned, but went on  writing  in  a  scorching
scrawl  whatever she was writing. A third letter, presumably (two in stamped
envelopes were already laid out on the desk). I went back to the kitchen.
     I set out  two  glasses  (to  St.  Algebra?  to  Lo?)  and  opened  the
refrigerator.  It  roared  at  me viciously while I removed the ice from its
heart. Rewrite. Let her read it again. She will not recall details.  Change,
forge.  Write a fragment and show it to her or leave it lying around. Why do
faucets sometimes whine so  horribly?  A  horrible  situation,  really.  The
little   pillow-shaped   blocks   of  ice--pillows  for  polar  teddy  bear,
Lo--emitted rasping, crackling, tortured sounds as the warm  water  loosened
them in their cells. I bumped down the glasses side by side. I poured in the
whiskey  and  a dram of soda. She had tabooed my pin. Bark and bang went the
icebox. Carrying the glasses, I walked through the  dining  room  and  spoke
through  the  parlor  door which was a fraction ajar, not quite space enough
for my elbow.
     "I have made you a drink," I said.
     She did not answer, the mad bitch, and I  placed  the  glasses  on  the
sideboard near the telephone, which had started to ring.
     "Leslie  speaking. Leslie Tomson," said Leslie Tomson who favored a dip
at dawn. "Mrs. Humbert, sir, has been run over and you'd better come quick."
     I answered, perhaps a bit testily, that my wife was safe and sound, and
still holding the receiver, I pushed open the door and said:
     "There's this man saying you've been killed, Charlotte."
     But there was no Charlotte in the living room.

I rushed out. The far side of  our  steep  little  street  presented  a
peculiar  sight.  A  big  black  glossy  Packard had climbed Miss Opposite's
sloping lawn at an angle from the  sidewalk  (where  a  tartan  laprobe  had
dropped in a heap), and stood there, shining in the sun, its doors open like
wings, its front wheels deep in evergreen shrubbery. To the anatomical right
of  this  car,  on  the trim turn of the lawn-slope, an old gentleman with a
white  mustache,  well-dressed--double-breasted  gray   suit,   polka-dotted
bow-tie--lay supine, his long legs together, like a death-size wax figure. I
have  to put the impact of an instantaneous vision into a sequence of words;
their physical accumulation in the page impairs the actual flash, the  sharp
unity  of  impression:  Rug-heap, car, old man-doll, Miss O.'s nurse running
with a rustle, a half-empty tumbler  in  her  hand,  back  to  the  screened
porch--where  the  propped-up,  imprisoned,  decrepit  lady  herself  may be
imagined screeching, but not loud enough to drown the rhythmical yaps of the
Junk setter walking from group to group--from a bunch of  neighbors  already
collected  on  the  sidewalk, near the bit of checked stuff, and back to the
car which he had finally run to earth, and then  to  another  group  on  the
lawn,  consisting  of  Leslie,  two policemen and a sturdy man with tortoise
shell glasses. At this point, I should explain that the prompt appearance of
the patrolmen, hardly more than a minute after  the  accident,  was  due  to
their  having  been  ticketing the illegally parked cars in a cross lane two
blocks down the grade; that the fellow with the glasses was Frederick Beale,
Jr., driver of the Packard; that his 79-year-old father, whom the nurse  had
just  watered  on  the  green  bank  where  he  lay--a  banked  banker so to
speak--was not in  a  dead  faint,  but  was  comfortably  and  methodically
recovering  from  a mild heart attack or its possibility; and, finally, that
the laprobe on the sidewalk (where she had so often pointed out to  me  with
disapproval  the  crooked  green  cracks)  concealed  the mangled remains of
Charlotte Humbert who had been knocked down and dragged several feet by  the
Beale car as she was hurrying across the street to drop three letters in the
mailbox,  at  the  corner  of Miss Opposite's lawn. These were picked up and
handed to me by a pretty child in a dirty pink frock, and I got rid of  them
by clawing them to fragments in my trouser pocket.
     Three  doctors  and the Farlows presently arrived on the scene and took
over. The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control,  neither  wept  nor
raved.  He  staggered  a  bit,  that he did; but he opened his mouth only to
impart such information or issue such directions as were strictly  necessary
in  connection  with  the identification, examination and disposal of a dead
woman, the top of her head a porridge  of  bone,  brains,  bronze  hair  and
blood.  The  sun  was still a blinding red when he was put to bed in Dolly's
room by his two friends, gentle John and dewy-eyed Jean; who,  to  be  near,
retired  to the Humberts' bedroom for the night; which, for all I know, they
may not have spent as innocently as the solemnity of the occasion required.
     I have no reason  to  dwell,  in  this  very  special  memoir,  on  the
pre-funeral  formalities  that  had  to  be  attended  to, or on the funeral
itself, which was as quiet as the marriage had been.  But  a  few  incidents
pertaining  to  those four or five days after Charlotte's simple death, have
to be noted.
     My first night of widowhood I was so drunk that I slept as  soundly  as
the  child who had slept in that bed. Next morning I hastened to inspect the
fragments of letters in my pocket. They had got too thoroughly mixed  up  to
be sorted into three complete sets. I assumed that ". . . and you had better
find  it  because  I  cannot buy . . . " came from a letter to Lo; and other
fragments seemed to point to Charlotte's intention of  fleeing  with  Lo  to
Parkington,  or  even  back  to  Pisky, lest the vulture snatch her precious
lamb. Other tatters and shreds (never  had  I  thought  I  had  such  strong
talons)  obviously  referred  to an application not to St. A. but to another
boarding school which was said to be so harsh and  gray  and  gaunt  in  its
methods  (although  supplying  croquet under the elms) as to have earned the
nickname of "Reformatory for Young Ladies." Finally, the third  epistle  was
obviously  addressed  to me. I made out such items as ". . . after a year of
separation we may . . . " ". . . oh, my dearest, oh my . . . " ". . .  worse
than  if it had been a woman you kept . . ." ". . . or, maybe, I shall die .
. ." But on the whole my gleanings made little sense; the various  fragments
of  those  three  hasty missives were as jumbled in the palms of my hands as
their elements had been in poor Charlotte's head.
     That day John had to see a customer, and Jean had to feed her dogs, and
so I was to be deprived temporarily of my friends' company. The dear  people
were afraid I might commit suicide if left alone, and since no other friends
were  available  (Miss  Opposite  was  incommunicado,  the  McCoos were busy
building a new house miles away, and the Chatfields had been recently called
to Maine by some family trouble  of  their  own),  Leslie  and  Louise  were
commissioned to keep me company under the pretense of helping me to sort out
and pack a multitude of orphaned things. In a moment of superb inspiration I
showed  the  kind  and credulous Farlows (we were waiting for Leslie to come
for his paid tryst with Louise) a little photograph of Charlotte I had found
among her affairs. From a boulder she smiled through blown hair. It had been
taken in April 1934, a memorable spring. While on a business  visit  to  the
States, I had had occasion to spend several months in Pisky. We met--and had
a  mad  love  affair.  I was married, alas, and she was engaged to Haze, but
after I returned to Europe, we corresponded through a friend, now dead. Jean
whispered she had heard some rumors and looked at the snapshot,  and,  still
looking,  handed  it to John, and John removed his pipe and looked at lovely
and fast Charlotte Becker, and handed it back to me. Then they  left  for  a
few hours. Happy Louise was gurgling and scolding her swain in the basement.
     Hardly  had  the  Farlows gone than a blue-chinned cleric called--and I
tried to make the interview as brief as was consistent with neither  hurting
his feelings nor arousing his doubts. Yes, I would devote all my life to the
child's  welfare.  Here,  incidentally,  was  a  little cross that Charlotte
Becker had given me when we were both  young.  I  had  a  female  cousin,  a
respectable  spinster in New York. There we would find a good private school
for Dolly. Oh, what a crafty Humbert!
     For the benefit of Leslie and Louise who might (and did) report  it  to
John   and   Jean  I  made  a  tremendously  loud  and  beautifully  enacted
long-distance call and simulated a conversation with  Shirley  Holmes.  When
John  and  Jean  returned,  I  completely took them in by telling them, in a
deliberately  wild  and  confused  mutter,  that  Lo  had  gone   with   the
intermediate group on a five-day hike and could not be reached.
     "Good Lord," said Jean, "what shall we do?"
     John  said  it  was perfectly simple--he would get the Climax police to
find the hikers--it would not take them  an  hour.  In  fact,  he  knew  the
country and--
     "Look,"  he  continued,  "why don' I drive there right now, and you may
sleep with Jean"--(he did not really add that but Jean supported  his  offer
so passionately that it might be implied).
     I  broke  down.  I  pleaded with John to let things remain the way they
were. I said I could not bear to have the  child  all  around  me,  sobbing,
clinging  to  me,  she was so high-strung, the experience might react on her
future, psychiatrists have analyzed such cases. There was a sudden pause.
     "Well, you are the doctor," said John a little bluntly. "But after  all
I  was  Charlotte's  friend and adviser. One would like to know what you are
going to do about the child anyway."
     "John," cried Jean, "she is his child, not  Harold  Haze's.  Don't  you
understand? Humbert is Dolly's real father."
     "I see," said John. "I am sorry. Yes. I see. I did not realize that. It
simplifies matters, of course. And whatever you feel is right."
     The distraught father went on to say he would go and fetch his delicate
daughter  immediately after the funeral, and would do his best to give her a
good time in totally different surroundings, perhaps a trip to New Mexico or
California--granted, of course, he lived.
     So artistically did I impersonate the calm  of  ultimate  despair,  the
hush  before  some  crazy  outburst,  that the perfect Farlows removed me to
their house. They had a good cellar, as cellars go in this country; and that
was helpful, for I feared insomnia and a ghost.
     Now  I  must  explain  my  reasons  for  keeping  Dolores  away.
Naturally,  at  first,  when  Charlotte  had  just  been  eliminated  and  I
re-entered  the  house  a   free   father,   and   gulped   down   the   two
whiskey-and-sodas  I  had prepared, and topped them with a pint or two of my
"pin," and went to the bathroom to get  away  from  neighbors  and  friends,
there  was  but one thing in my mind and pulse--namely, the awareness that a
few hours hence, warm, brown--haired, and mine, mine, mine, Lolita would  be
in  my  arms,  shedding  tears that I would kiss away faster than they could
well. But as I stood wide-eyed and flushed before the  mirror,  John  Farlow
tenderly  tapped  to  inquire  if  I was okay--and I immediately realized it
would be madness on my part  to  have  her  in  the  house  with  all  those
busybodies  milling  around  and  scheming to take her away from me. Indeed,
unpredictable Lo herself might--who knows?--show some  foolish  distrust  of
me,  a  sudden  repugnance,  vague  fear and the like--and gone would be the
magic prize at the very instant of triumph.
     Speaking of busybodies, I had another visitor--friend Beale, the fellow
who eliminated my wife. Stodgy and solemn, looking like a kind of  assistant
executioner,  with  his  bulldog  jowls,  small  black  eyes, thickly rimmed
glasses and conspicuous nostrils, he was ushered in by John  who  then  left
us,  closing  the  door upon us, with the utmost tact. Suavely saying he had
twins in my stepdaughter's class, my  grotesque  visitor  unrolled  a  large
diagram  he  had made of the accident. It was, as my stepdaughter would have
put it, "a beaut," with all kinds of impressive arrows and dotted  lines  in
varicolored  inks.  Mrs. H.H.'s trajectory was illustrated at several points
by a series of those little outline figures--doll-like wee  career  girl  or
WAC--used  in statistics as visual aids. Very clearly and conclusively, this
route came into contact with a boldly traced sinuous line  representing  two
consecutive swerves--one which the Beale car made to avoid the Junk dog (dog
not shown), and the second, a kind of exaggerated continuation of the first,
meant  to avert the tragedy. A very black cross indicated the spot where the
trim little outline figure had at last come  to  rest  on  the  sidewalk.  I
looked  for some similar mark to denote the place on the embankment where my
visitor's huge wax father had reclined, but there was none. That  gentleman,
however,  had signed the document as a witness underneath the name of Leslie
Tomson, Miss Opposite and a few other people.
     With his hummingbird pencil deftly and delicately flying from one point
to another,  Frederick  demonstrated  his   absolute   innocence   and   the
recklessness  of  my  wife:  while  he  was  in the act of avoiding the dog,
she slipped on  the  freshly  watered  asphalt  and  plunged  forward
whereas  she should have flung herself not forward but backward (Fred showed
how by a jerk of his padded shoulder). I  said  it  was  certainly  not  his
fault, and the inquest upheld my view.
     Breathing  violently though jet-black tense nostrils, he shook his head
and  my  hand;  then,  with  an  air  of  perfect  savoir  vivre  and
gentlemanly  generosity,  he  offered  to  pay the funeral-home expenses. He
expected me to refuse his offer. With a drunken sob of gratitude I  accepted
it.  This  took  him  aback.  Slowly, incredulously, he repeated what he had
said. I thanked him again, even more profusely than before.
     In result of that weird interview, the numbness of my soul  was  for  a
moment resolved. And no wonder! I had actually seen the agent of fate. I had
palpated  the  very  flesh of fate--and its padded shoulder. A brilliant and
monstrous mutation had suddenly taken place, and here  was  the  instrument.
Within   the  intricacies  of  the  pattern  (hurrying  housewife,  slippery
pavement, a pest of a dog, steep grade, big car, baboon  at  its  wheel),  I
could  dimly  distinguish  my  own  vile contribution. Had I not been such a
fool--or such an intuitive genius--to preserve that journal, fluids produced
by vindictive anger and hot shame would not have blinded  Charlotte  in  her
dash to the mailbox. But even had they blinded her, still nothing might have
happened, had not precise fate, that synchronizing phantom, mixed within its
alembic  the  car  and the dog and the sun and the shade and the wet and the
weak and the strong  and  the  stone.  Adieu,  Marlene!  Fat  fate's  formal
handshake (as reproduced by Beale before leaving the room) brought me out of
my torpor; and I wept. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury--I wept.

The  elms  and the poplars were turning their ruffled backs to a sudden
onslaught of wind, and a black thunderhead  loomed  above  Ramsdale's  white
church  tower  when  I  looked  around  me  for  the  last time. For unknown
adventures I was leaving the livid house where I had rented a room only  ten
weeks  before.  The  shades--thrifty,  practical bamboo shades--were already
down. On porches or in the house their rich textures lend modern drama.  The
house  of  heaven  must  seem  pretty bare after that. A raindrop fell on my
knuckles. I went back into the house for something or other while  John  was
putting my bags into the car, and then a funny thing happened. I do not know
if in these tragic notes I have sufficiently stressed the peculiar "sending"
effect  that  the  writer's  good looks--pseudo-Celtic, attractively simian,
boyishly manly--had on women of every age and environment. Of  course,  such
announcements  made in the first person may sound ridiculous. But every once
in a while I  have  to  remind  the  reader  of  my  appearance  much  as  a
professional  novelist, who has given a character of his some mannerism or a
dog, has to go on producing that  dog  or  that  mannerism  every  time  the
character crops up in the course of the book. There may be more to it in the
present  case.  My  gloomy good looks should be kept in the mind's eye if my
story is to be properly understood. Pubescent Lo swooned to Humbert's  charm
as she did to hiccuppy music; adult Lotte loved me with a mature, possessive
passion that I now deplore and respect more than I care to say. Jean Farlow,
who  was thirty-one and absolutely neurotic, had also apparently developed a
strong liking for me. She was handsome in a carved-Indian sort of way,  with
a burnt sienna complexion. Her lips were like large crimson polyps, and when
she  emitted her special barking laugh, she showed large dull teeth and pale
gums.
     She was very tall, wore either slacks with sandals or billowing  skirts
with  ballet  slippers,  drank  any strong liquor in any amount, had had two
miscarriages, wrote stories about animals, painted,  as  the  reader  knows,
lakescapes,  was  already  nursing  the  cancer  that  was  to  kill  her at
thirty-three, and was hopelessly unattractive to me. Judge then of my  alarm
when a few seconds before I left (she and I stood in the hallway) Jean, with
her  always  trembling  fingers,  took  me by the temples, and, tears in her
bright blue eyes, attempted, unsuccessfully, to glue herself to my lips.
     "Take care of yourself," she said, "kiss your daughter for me."
     A clap of thunder reverberated throughout the house, and she added:
     "Perhaps, somewhere, some day, at a less miserable  time,  we  may  see
each  other again" (Jean, whatever, wherever you are, in minus time-space or
plus soul-time, forgive me all this, parenthesis included).
     And presently I was shaking hands with both of them in the street,  the
sloping   street,   and  everything  was  whirling  and  flying  before  the
approaching white deluge, and a truck with a mattress from Philadelphia  was
confidently  rolling  down  to  an  empty  house,  and  dust was running and
writhing over the exact slab of stone where Charlotte, when they lifted  the
laprobe  for  me, had been revealed, curled up, her eyes intact, their black
lashes still wet, matted, like yours, Lolita.

One might suppose that with  all  blocks  removed  and  a  prospect  of
delirious and unlimited delights before me, I would have mentally sunk back,
heaving  a sigh of delicious relief. Eh bien, pas du tout! Instead of
basking in the beams of smiling Chance, I  was  obsessed  by  all  sorts  of
purely  ethical doubts and fears. For instance: might it not surprise people
that Lo was so consistently debarred  from  attending  festive  and  funeral
functions  in  her immediate family? You remember--we had not had her at our
wedding. Or another thing: granted it was the long hairy arm of  Coincidence
that  had  reached  out  to  remove an innocent woman, might Coincidence not
ignore in a heathen moment what its  twin  lamb  had  done  and  hand  Lo  a
premature  note  of commiseration? True, the accident had been reported only
by the Ramsdale Journal--not by the Parkington Recorder or the
Climax Herald, Camp Q being in another state, and local deaths having
no federal news interest; but I could not help fancying that  somehow  Dolly
Haze had been informed already, and that at the very time I was on my way to
fetch  her, she was being driven to Ramsdale by friends unknown to me. Still
more disquieting than all these conjectures and worries, was the  fact  that
Humbert  Humbert,  a  brand-new American citizen of obscure European origin,
had taken no steps toward becoming the legal guardian  of  his  dead  wife's
daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old). Would I ever dare take those
steps? I could not repress a shiver whenever I imagined my nudity hemmed  in
by mysterious statutes in the merciless glare of the Common Law.
     My  scheme was a marvel of primitive art: I would whizz over to Camp Q,
tell Lolita her mother was about to undergo a major operation at an invented
hospital, and then keep moving with my sleepy nymphet from inn to inn  while
her  mother  got  better  and  better  and  finally  died. But as I traveled
campward my anxiety grew. I could not bear to think I might not find  Lolita
there--or  find,  instead, another, scared, Lolita clamoring for some family
friend: not the Farlows, thank God--she hardly knew  them--but  might  there
not  be other people I had not reckoned with? Finally, I decided to make the
long-distance call I had simulated so well a few days before. It was raining
hard when I pulled up in a muddy suburb of Parkington, just before the Fork,
one prong of which bypassed the city and led to the  highway  which  crossed
the  hills  to  Lake  Climax  and Camp Q. I flipped off the ignition and for
quite a minute sat in the car bracing myself for that  telephone  call,  and
staring  at  the  rain,  at  the inundated sidewalk, at a hydrant: a hideous
thing, really, painted a thick silver and red, extending the red  stumps  of
its  arms to be varnished by the rain which like stylized blood dripped upon
its argent chains. No wonder that stopping beside those  nightmare  cripples
is  taboo.  I  drove up to a gasoline station. A surprise awaited me when at
last the coins had satisfactorily clanked down and a voice  was  allowed  to
answer mine.
     Holmes, the camp mistress, informed me that Dolly had gone Monday (this
was Wednesday)  on  a  hike  in the hills with her group and was expected to
return rather late today. Would I  care  to  come  tomorrow,  and  what  was
exactly--Without   going   into   details,   I  said  that  her  mother  was
hospitalized, that the situation was grave, that the  child  should  not  be
told  it  was  grave  and that she should be ready to leave with me tomorrow
afternoon. The two voices parted in an explosion of warmth  and  good  will,
and through some freak mechanical flaw all my coins came tumbling back to me
with  a  hitting-the-jackpot  clatter  that almost made me laugh despite the
disappointment at having to postpone  bliss.  One  wonders  if  this  sudden
discharge, this spasmodic refund, was not correlated somehow, in the mind of
McFate,  with my having invented that little expedition before ever learning
of it as I did now.
     What next? I proceeded to the business center of Parkington and devoted
the whole afternoon  (the  weather  had  cleared,  the  wet  town  was  like
silver-and-glass)  to  buying  beautiful things for Lo. Goodness, what crazy
purchases were prompted by the poignant predilection Humbert  had  in  those
days  for  check  weaves,  bright cottons, frills, puffed-out short sleeves,
soft pleats, snug-fitting bodices and generously full skirts! Oh Lolita, you
are my girl, as Vee was Poe's and Bea Dante's, and what  little  girl  would
not  like  to  whirl  in a circular skirt and scanties? Did I have something
special in mind? coaxing voices asked me. Swimming suits? We  have  them  in
all  shades. Dream pink, frosted aqua, glans mauve, tulip red, oolala black.
What about playsuits? Slips? No slips. Lo and I loathed slips.
     One of my guides in these matters was an anthropometric entry  made  by
her   mother   on   Lo's   twelfth   birthday  (the  reader  remembers  that
Know-Your-Child book). I had the feeling that Charlotte,  moved  by  obscure
motives  of  envy  and  dislike,  had added an inch here, a pound there; but
since the nymphet had no doubt grown somewhat in the last  seven  months,  I
thought I could safely accept most of those January measurements: hip girth,
twenty-nine  inches; thigh girth (just below the gluteal sulcus), seventeen;
calf  girth   and   neck   circumference,   eleven;   chest   circumference,
twenty-seven;   upper   arm  girth,  eight;  waist,  twenty-three;  stature,
fifty-seven  inches;   weight,   seventy-eight   pounds;   figure,   linear;
intelligence quotient, 121; vermiform appendix present, thank God.
     Apart  from  measurements,  I  could  of  course  visualize Lolita with
hallucinational lucidity; and nursing as I did a tingle on my breastbone  at
the exact spot her silky top had come level once or twice with my heart; and
feeling  as  I  did  her  warm  weight in my lap (so that, in a sense, I was
always "with Lolita" as a woman is "with child"), I  was  not  surprised  to
discover  later  that  my  computation had been more or less correct. Having
moreover studied a midsummer sale book, it was with a very knowing air  that
I  examined various pretty articles, sport shoes, sneakers, pumps of crushed
kid for crushed kids. The painted girl in black who attended  to  all  these
poignant  needs  of mine turned parental scholarship and precise description
into commercial euphemisms, such as  "petite."  Another,  much  older
woman,  in  a  white  dress,  with  a  pancake  make-up,  seemed to be oddly
impressed by my knowledge of junior fashions; perhaps I  had  a  midget  for
mistress;   so,  when  shown  a  skirt  with  "cute"  pockets  in  front,  I
intentionally put a naive male  question  and  was  rewarded  by  a  smiling
demonstration  of  the way the zipper worked in the back of the skirt. I had
next great fun with all kinds of shorts and briefs--phantom  little  Lolitas
dancing, falling, daisying all over the counter. We rounded up the deal with
some  prim cotton pajamas in popular butcher-boy style. Humbert, the popular
butcher.
     There is a touch of the mythological and the enchanted in  those  large
stores  where according to ads a career girl can get a complete desk-to-date
wardrobe, and where little sister can dream of the day when her wool  jersey
will make the boys in the back row of the classroom drool. Life-size plastic
figures  of snubbed-nosed children with dun-colored, greenish, brown-dotted,
faunish faces floated around me. I realized I was the only shopper  in  that
rather  eerie  place where I moved about fishlike, in a glaucous aquarium. I
sensed strange thoughts form  in  the  minds  of  the  languid  ladies  that
escorted  me  from  counter  to counter, from rock ledge to seaweed, and the
belts and the bracelets I  chose  seemed  to  fall  from  siren  hands  into
transparent water. I bought an elegant valise, had my purchases put into it,
and repaired to the nearest hotel, well pleased with my day.
     Somehow, in connection with that quiet poetical afternoon of fastidious
shopping,  I  recalled  the  hotel  or  inn  with  the seductive name of The
Enchanted Hunters with Charlotte had happened to mention shortly  before  my
liberation.  With  the help of a guidebook I located it in the secluded town
of Briceland, a four-hour drive from Lo's camp. I could have telephoned  but
fearing my voice might go out of control and lapse into coy croaks of broken
English,  I  decided  to  send a wire ordering a room with twin beds for the
next night. What a comic, clumsy, wavering Prince Charming I was!  How  some
of  my  readers will laugh at me when I tell them the trouble I had with the
wording of my telegram! What should I put: Humbert and daughter? Humberg and
small daughter? Homberg and immature girl?  Homburg  and  child?  The  droll
mistake--the  "g"  at the end--which eventually came through may have been a
telepathic echo of these hesitations of mine.
     And then, in the velvet of a summer night, my broodings over the philer
I had with me! Oh miserly Hamburg! Was he not a very Enchanted Hunter as  he
deliberated  with  himself  over his boxful of magic ammunition? To rout the
monster of insomnia should he try himself one of  those  amethyst  capsules?
There were forty of them, all told--forty nights with a frail little sleeper
at  my  throbbing  side;  could  I  rob myself of one such night in order to
sleep? Certainly not: much too precious was each tiny plum, each microscopic
planetarium with its live stardust. Oh, let me be mawkish for the nonce!  I
am so tired of being cynical.

This  daily  headache  in  the  opaque  air  of  this  tombal  jail  is
disturbing, but I must persevere. Have written more than a hundred pages and
not got anywhere yet. My calendar is getting confused. That must  have  been
around  August  15,  1947. Don't think I can go on. Heart, head--everything.
Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,
Lolita. Repeat till the page is full, printer.

Still  in  Parkington.  Finally,  I did achieve an hour's slumber--from
which I was aroused by gratuitous and horribly exhausting  congress  with  a
small  hairy  hermaphrodite,  a  total  stranger.  By then it was six in the
morning, and it suddenly occurred to me it might be a good thing  to  arrive
at  the  camp earlier than I had said. From Parkington I had still a hundred
miles to go, and there would be  more  than  that  to  the  Hazy  Hills  and
Briceland.  If  I  had  said I would come for Dolly in the afternoon, it was
only because my fancy insisted on merciful night falling as soon as possible
upon my impatience. But now I foresaw all kinds of misunderstandings and was
all a-jitter lest  delay  might  give  her  the  opportunity  of  some  idle
telephone call to Ramsdale. However, when at 9.30 a.m. I attempted to start,
I  was  confronted  by a dead battery, and noon was nigh when at last I left
Parkington.
     I reached my destination around half past two; parked my car in a  pine
grove  where a green-shirted, redheaded impish lad stood throwing horseshoes
in sullen solitude; was laconically directed by him to an office in a stucco
cottage; in a dying state, had to endure for several minutes the inquisitive
commiseration of the camp mistress, a sluttish worn out  female  with  rusty
hair. Dolly she said was all packed and ready to go. She knew her mother was
sick  but  not critically. Would Mr. Haze, I mean, Mr. Humbert, care to meet
the camp counselors? Or look at  the  cabins  where  the  girls  live?  Each
dedicated  to  a  Disney  creature? Or visit the Lodge? Or should Charlie be
sent over to fetch her? The girls were just finishing fixing the Dining Room
for a dance. (And perhaps afterwards she would say  to  somebody  or  other:
"The poor guy looked like his own ghost.")
     Let  me  retain  for a moment that scene in all its trivial and fateful
detail: hag Holmes writing out a receipt, scratching  her  head,  pulling  a
drawer  out  of her desk, pouring change into my impatient palm, then neatly
spreading a banknote over it with a bright ". . . and five!"; photographs of
girl-children; some gaudy moth or butterfly, still alive, safely  pinned  to
the  wall  ("nature  study"); the framed diploma of the camp's dietitian; my
trembling hands; a card produced by efficient Holmes with a report of  Dolly
Haze's  behavior  for July ("fair to good; keen on swimming and boating"); a
sound of trees and birds, and my pounding heart . . . I was standing with my
back to the open door, and then I felt the blood rush to my head as I  heart
her  respiration  and  voice behind me. She arrived dragging and bumping her
heavy suitcase. "Hi!" she said, and stood still, looking  at  me  with  sly,
glad  eyes,  her  soft  lips  parted  in  a slightly foolish but wonderfully
endearing smile.
     She was thinner and taller, and for a second it seemed to me  her  face
was  less  pretty  than  the  mental imprint I had cherished for more than a
month: her cheeks looked hollowed and too much lentigo camouflaged her  rosy
rustic  features;  and  that  first impression (a very narrow human interval
between two tiger heartbeats) carried the clear implication that all widower
Humbert had to do, wanted to do, or would do, was to give  this  wan-looking
though  sun-colored  little  orphan  au  yeux  battus (and even those
plumbaceous umbrae under her  eyes  bore  freckles)  a  sound  education,  a
healthy and happy girlhood, a clean home, nice girl-friends of her age among
whom  (if  the  fates  deigned  to repay me) I might find, perhaps, a pretty
little Magdlein for Herr Doktor Humbert alone. But "in  a  wink,"  as
the  Germans  say, the angelic line of conduct was erased, and I overtook my
prey (time moves ahead of our fancies!), and she  was  my  Lolita  again--in
fact,  more  of  my  Lolita than ever. I let my hand rest on her warm auburn
head and took up her bag. She  was  all  rose  and  honey,  dressed  in  her
brightest  gingham,  with  a  pattern of little red apples, and her arms and
legs were of a deep golden brown, with scratches like tiny dotted  lines  of
coagulated  rubies, and the ribbed cuffs of her white socks were turned down
at the remembered level, and because of her childish gait, or because I  had
memorized  her  as  always wearing heelless shoes, her saddle oxfords looked
somehow too large and too high-heeled for her. Good-bye, Camp Q, merry  Camp
Q.  Good-bye,  plain  unwholesome food, good-bye Charlie boy. In the hot car
she settled down beside me, slapped a prompt fly on her lovely  knee;  then,
her  mouth  working violently on a piece of chewing gum, she rapidly cranked
down the window on her side and settled back  again.  We  sped  through  the
striped and speckled forest.
     "How's Mother?" she asked dutifully.
     I said the doctors did not quite know yet what the trouble was. Anyway,
something abdominal. Abominable? No, abdominal. We would have to hang around
for a  while.  The  hospital  was  in  the  country,  near  the  gay town of
Lepingville, where a great poet had resided in the early nineteenth  century
and  where  we would take in all the shows. She thought it a peachy idea and
wondered if we could make Lepingville before nine p.m.
     "We should be at Briceland by dinner time," I said, "and tomorrow we'll
visit Lepingville. How was the hike? Did you have a marvelous  time  at  the
camp?"
     "Uh-huh."
     "Sorry to leave?"
     "Un-un."
     "Talk, Lo--don't grunt. Tell me something."
     "What thing, Dad?" (she let the word expand with ironic deliberation).
     "Any old thing."
     "Okay, if I call you that?" (eyes slit at the road).
     "Quite."
     "It's a sketch, you know. When did you fall for my mummy?"
     "Some  day,  Lo, you will understand many emotions and situations, such
as for example the harmony, the beauty of spiritual relationship."
     "Bah!" said the cynical nymphet.
     Shallow lull in the dialogue, filled with some landscape.
     "Look, Lo, at all those cows on that hillside."
     "I think I'll vomit if I look at a cow again."
     "You know, I missed you terribly, Lo."
     "I did not. Fact I've been revoltingly unfaithful to you, but it
does not matter one bit, because you've stopped caring for me,  anyway.  You
drive much faster than my mummy, mister."
     I slowed down from a blind seventy to a purblind fifty.
     "Why do you think I have ceased caring for you, Lo?"
     "Well, you haven't kissed me yet, have you?"
     Inly dying, inly moaning, I glimpsed a reasonably wide shoulder of road
ahead,  and bumped and wobbled into the weeds. Remember she is only a child,
remember she is only--
     Hardly had the car come to a standstill than Lolita  positively  flowed
into  my  arms.  Not  daring,  not daring let myself go--not even daring let
myself realize that this (sweet wetness and trembling fire)  was  the
beginning  of the ineffable life which, ably assisted by fate, I had finally
willed into being--not daring really kiss her, I touched  her  hot,  opening
lips  with  the utmost piety, tiny sips, nothing salacious; but she, with an
impatient wriggle, pressed her mouth to mine so hard that  I  felt  her  big
front  teeth  and  shared  in the peppermint taste of her saliva. I knew, of
course, it was but an innocent game on her part, a bit of backfisch  foolery
in  imitation  of  some  simulacrum  of  fake  romance,  and  since  (as the
psychotherapist, as well as the rapist, will tell you) the limits and  rules
of  such  girlish games are fluid, or at least too childishly subtle for the
senior partner to grasp--I was dreadfully afraid I  might  go  too  far  and
cause  her  to  start  back in revulsion and terror. And, as above all I was
agonizingly anxious to smuggle  her  into  the  hermetic  seclusion  of  The
Enchanted  Hunters,  and  we had still eighty miles to go, blessed intuition
broke our embrace--a split second  before  a  highway  patrol  car  drew  up
alongside.
     Florid and beetle-browed, its driver stared at me:
     "Happen  to  see  a blue sedan, same make as yours, pass you before the
junction?"
     "Why, no."
     "We didn't," said Lo, eagerly leaning across me, her innocent  hand  on
my legs, "but are you sure it was blue, because--"
     The  cop  (what shadow of us was he after?) gave the little colleen his
best smile and went into a U-turn.
     We drove on.
     "The fruithead!" remarked Lo. "He should have nabbed you."
     "Why me for heaven's sake?"
     "Well, the speed in this bum state is fifty, and--No, don't slow  down,
you, dull bulb. He's gone now."
     "We  have  still  quite  a  stretch,"  I said, "and I want to get there
before dark. So be a good girl."
     "Bad, bad girl," said Lo comfortably. "Juvenile delickwent,  but  frank
and fetching. That light was red. I've never seen such driving."
     We rolled silently through a silent townlet.
     "Say,  wouldn't  Mother  be  absolutely  mad  if  she found out we were
lovers?"
     "Good Lord, Lo, let us not talk that way."
     "But we are lovers, aren't we?"
     "Not that I know of. I think we are going to have some more rain. Don't
you want to tell me of those little pranks of yours in camp?"
     "You talk like a book, Dad."
     "What have you been up to? I insist you tell me."
     "Are you easily shocked?"
     "No. Go on."
     "Let us turn into a secluded lane and I'll tell you."
     "Lo, I must seriously ask you not to play the fool. Well?"
     "Well--I joined in all the activities that were offered."
     "Ensuite?"
     "Ansooit, I was taught to live happily and richly with  others  and  to
develop a wholesome personality. Be a cake, in fact."
     "Yes. I saw something of the sort in the booklet."
     "We loved the sings around the fire in the big stone fireplace or under
the darned  stars,  where every girl merged her own spirit of happiness with
the voice of the group."
     "Your memory is excellent, Lo, but I must trouble you to leave out  the
swear words. Anything else?"
     "The  Girl Scout's motto," said Lo rhapsodically, "is also mine. I fill
my life with worthwhile deeds such as--well, never mind what. My duty is--to
be useful. I am a friend to male animals. I obey orders. I am cheerful. That
was another police car. I am thrifty and I am absolutely filthy in  thought,
word and deed."
     "Now I do hope that's all, you witty child."
     "Yep.  That's  all. No--wait a sec. We baked in a reflector oven. Isn't
that terrific?"
     "Well, that's better."
     "We washed zillions of dishes.  'Zillions'  you  know  is  schoolmarm's
slang  for  many-many-many-many.  Oh  yes,  last  but  not  least, as Mother
says--Now let me see--what was it? I know we made  shadowgraphs.  Gee,  what
fun."
     "C'est bien tout?"
     "C'est.  Except  for  one little thing, something I simply can't
tell you without blushing all over."
     "Will you tell it me later?"
     "If we sit in the dark and you let me whisper, I will. Do you sleep  in
your old room or in a heap with Mother?"
     "Old  room.  Your  mother may have to undergo a very serious operation,
Lo."
     "Stop at that candy bar, will you," said Lo.
     Sitting on a high stool, a band of sunlight  crossing  her  bare  brown
forearm,  Lolita  was  served  an elaborate ice-cream concoction topped with
synthetic syrup. It was erected and brought her by a pimply brute of  a  boy
in  a greasy bow-tie who eyed my fragile child in her thin cotton frock with
carnal deliberation. My impatience to  reach  Briceland  and  The  Enchanted
Hunters  was  becoming  more than I could endure. Fortunately she dispatched
the stuff with her usual alacrity.
     "How much cash do you have?" I asked.
     "Not a cent," she said sadly, lifting  her  eyebrows,  showing  me  the
empty inside of her money purse.
     "This  is a matter that will be mended in due time," I rejoined archly.
"Are you coming?"
     "Say, I wonder if they have a washroom."
     "you are not going there," I said Firmly. "It is  sure  to  be  a  vile
place. Do come on."
     She  was  on  the whole an obedient little girl and I kissed her in the
neck when we got back into the car.
     "Don't do that," she said looking at me with unfeigned surprise.
"Don't drool on me. You dirty man."
     She rubbed the spot against her raised shoulder.
     "Sorry," I murmured. "I'm rather fond of you, that's all."
     We drove under a gloomy sky, up a winding road, then down again.
     "Well, I'm also sort of fond of you," said Lolita  in  a  delayed  soft
voice, with a sort of sigh, and sort of settled closer to me.
     (Oh, my Lolita, we shall never get there!)
     Dusk  was  beginning  to  saturate  pretty  little Briceland, its phony
colonial architecture, curiosity sops and  imported  shade  trees,  when  we
drove through the weakly lighted streets in search of the Enchanted Hunters.
The  air,  despite  a  steady  drizzle beading it, was warm and green, and a
queue of people, mainly children and old men, had already formed before  the
box office of a movie house, dripping with jewel-fires.
     "Oh,  I  want  to  see  that  picture. Let's go right after dinner. Oh,
let's!"
     "We might," chanted Humbert--knowing perfectly well, the sly  tumescent
devil,  that  by  nine, when his show began, she would be dead in his
arms.
     "Easy!" cried Lo, lurching forward, as an accursed truck  in  front  of
us, its backside carbuncles pulsating, stopped at a crossing.
     If  we did not get to the hotel soon, immediately, miraculously, in the
very next block, I felt I would lose all control over the Haze  jalopy  with
its ineffectual wipers and whimsical brakes; but the passers-by I applied to
for  directions  were  either  strangers  themselves  or  asked with a frown
"Enchanted what?" as if I were  a  madman;  or  else  they  went  into  such
complicated    explanations,   with   geometrical   gestures,   geographical
generalities and strictly local clues (. . . then bear south after  you  hit
the  court-house.  .  .)  that I could not help losing my way in the maze of
their well-meaning  gibberish.  Lo,  whose  lovely  prismatic  entrails  had
already  digested  the  sweetmeat, was looking forward to a big meal and had
begun to fidget. As to me, although I had long become  used  to  a  kind  of
secondary  fate  (McFate's inept secretary, so to speak) pettily interfering
with the boss's generous magnificent plan--to grind and  grope  through  the
avenues  of  Briceland  was  perhaps  the most exasperating ordeal I had yet
faced. In later months I could laugh at my inexperience when  recalling  the
obstinate  boyish  way  in which I had concentrated upon that particular inn
with its fancy  name;  for  all  along  our  route  countless  motor  courts
proclaimed  their  vacancy  in  neon  lights, ready to accommodate salesmen,
escaped convicts, impotents, family groups, as well as the most corrupt  and
vigorous  couples. Ah, gentle drivers gliding through summer's black nights,
what frolics, what twists of  lust,  you  might  see  from  your  impeccable
highways  if Kumfy Kabins were suddenly drained of their pigments and became
as transparent as boxes of glass!
     The miracle I hankered for did happen after all. A man and a girl, more
or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees, told us we were in the
heart of The Park, but had only to turn left at the next traffic  light  and
there  we would be. We did not see any next traffic light--in fact, The Park
was as black as the sins it concealed--but  soon  after  falling  under  the
smooth  spell  of  a  nicely  graded  curve, the travelers became aware of a
diamond glow through the mist, then a gleam of lakewater appeared--and there
it was, marvelously and inexorably, under spectral trees, at the  top  of  a
graveled drive--the pale palace of The Enchanted Hunters.
     A  row  of parked cars, like pigs at a trough, seemed at first sight to
forbid access; but then, by magic, a  formidable  convertible,  resplendent,
rubious  in the lighted rain, came into motion--was energetically backed out
by a broad-shouldered driver--and we gratefully slipped into the gap it  had
left. I immediately regretted my haste for I noticed that my predecessor had
now  taken  advantage  of a garage-like shelter nearby where there was ample
space for another car; but I was too impatient to follow his example.
     "Wow! Looks swank," remarked my vulgar darling squinting at the  stucco
as  she  crept out into the audible drizzle and with a childish hand tweaked
loose the frock-fold that had struck in  the  peach-cleft--to  quote  Robert
Browning.  Under  the arclights enlarged replicas of chestnut leaves plunged
and played on white pillars. I unlocked the trunk compartment. A hunchbacked
and hoary Negro in a uniform of sorts took our bags and wheeled them  slowly
into  the  lobby. It was full of old ladies and clergy men. Lolita sank down
on her haunches to caress a pale-faced,  blue-freckled,  black-eared  cocker
spaniel  swooning  on the floral carpet under her hand--as who would not, my
heart--while I cleared my throat through the throng to  the  desk.  There  a
bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel--examined my
features with a polite smile, then leisurely produced my (garbled) telegram,
wrestled with some dark doubts, turned his head to look at  the  clock,  and
finally said he was very sorry, he had held the room with the twin beds till
half  past  six,  and  now it was gone. A religious convention, he said, had
clashed with a flower show in Briceland, and--"The name," I said coldly, "is
not Humberg and not Humbug, but Herbert, I mean Humbert, and any  room  will
do, just put in a cot for my little daughter. She is ten and very tired."
     The  pink  old  fellow  peered  good-naturedly  at Lo--still squatting,
listening in profile, lips parted, to what the dog's  mistress,  an  ancient
lady  swathed in violet veils, was telling her from the depths of a cretonne
easy chair.
     Whatever doubts the obscene fellow had, they  were  dispelled  by  that
blossom-like  vision.  He  said,  he  might  still  have a room, had one, in
fact--with a double bed. As to the cot--
     "Mr. Potts, do we have any cots left?" Potts, also pink and bald,  with
white hairs growing out of his ears and other holes, would see what could be
done.  He  came  and  spoke  while  I  unscrewed  my fountain pen. Impatient
Humbert!
     "Our double beds are really triple," Potts cozily said tucking  me  and
my  kid  in.  "One  crowded night we had three ladies and a child like yours
sleep together. I believe one of the ladies was a disguised  man  [my
static]. However--would there be a spare cot in 49, Mr. Swine?
     "I think it went to the Swoons," said Swine, the initial old clown.
     "We'll  manage  somehow,"  I said. "My wife may join us later--but even
then, I suppose, we'll manage."
     The two pink pigs were now among my best friends.  In  the  slow  clear
hand  of  crime I wrote: Dr. Edgar H. Humbert and daughter, 342 Lawn Street,
Ramsdale. A key (342!) was half-shown to me (magician showing object  he  is
about  to  palm)--and  handed  over to Uncle tom. Lo, leaving the dog as she
would leave me some  day,  rose  from  her  haunches;  a  raindrop  fell  on
Charlotte's  grave; a handsome young Negress slipped open the elevator door,
and the doomed child went in followed  by  her  throat-clearing  father  and
crayfish Tom with the bags.
     Parody of a hotel corridor. Parody of silence and death.
     "Say, it's our house number," said cheerful Lo.
     There  was a double bed, a mirror, a double bed in the mirror, a closet
door with mirror, a bathroom door ditto, a blue-dark window, a reflected bed
there, the same in the closet mirror, two chairs, a glass-topped table,  two
bedtables,  a  double  bed: a big panel bed, to be exact, with a Tuscan rose
chenille spread, and two frilled, pink-shaded nightlamps, left and right.
     I was tempted to place a five-dollar  bill  in  that  sepia  palm,  but
thought  the  largesse  might  be misconstrued, so I placed a quarter. Added
another. He withdrew. Click. Enfin seuls.
     "Are we going to sleep in  one  room?"  said  Lo,  her  features
working  in  that dynamic way they did--not cross or disgusted (though plain
on the brink of it) but just dynamic--when she wanted  to  load  a  question
with violent significance.
     "I've asked them to put in a cot. Which I'll use if you like."
     "You are crazy," said Lo.
     "Why, my darling?"
     "Because,  my  dahrling,  when dahrling Mother finds out she'll divorce
you and strangle me."
     Just dynamic. Not really taking the matter too seriously.
     "Now look here," I said, sitting down, while she stood, a few feet away
from me, and stared at herself contentedly, not  unpleasantly  surprised  at
her  own  appearance,  filling  with her own rosy sunshine the surprised and
pleased closet-door mirror.
     "Look here, Lo. Let's settle this  once  for  all.  For  all  practical
purposes  I am your father. I have a feeling of great tenderness for you. In
your mother's absence I am responsible for your welfare. We  are  not  rich,
and  while  we  travel,  we shall be obliged--we shall be thrown a good deal
together. Two people sharing one room, inevitably  enter  into  a  kind--how
shall I say--a kind--"
     "The  word  is incest," said Lo--and walked into the closet, walked out
again with a young golden giggle,  opened  the  adjoining  door,  and  after
carefully  peering  inside with her strange smoky eyes lest she make another
mistake, retired to the bathroom.
     I opened the window, tore off my sweat-drenched shirt, changed, checked
the pill vial in my coat pocket, unlocked the--
     She drifted out. I tried to embrace her: casually, a bit of  controlled
tenderness before dinner.
     She  said:  "Look,  let's cut out the kissing game and get something to
eat."
     It was then that I sprang my surprise.
     Oh, what a dreamy pet! She  walked  up  to  the  open  suitcase  as  if
stalking  it  from  afar,  at  a  kind  of slow-motion walk, peering at that
distant treasure box on the luggage support. (Was there something  wrong,  I
wondered, with those great gray eyes of hers, or were we both plunged in the
same  enchanted  mist?) She stepped up to it, lifting her rather high-heeled
feet rather high, and bending  her  beautiful  boy-knees  while  she  walked
through  dilating  space  with the lentor of one walking under water or in a
flight dream. Then she raised by the armlets a copper-colored, charming  and
quite  expensive vest, very slowly stretching it between her silent hands as
if she were a bemused bird-hunter holding his  breath  over  the  incredible
bird  he  spreads  out by the tips of its flaming wings. Then (while I stood
waiting for her) she pulled out the slow snake of a brilliant belt and tried
it on.
     Then she crept into my waiting arms,  radiant,  relaxed,  caressing  me
with her tender, mysterious, impure, indifferent, twilight eyes--for all the
world,  like  the  cheapest  of  cheap  cuties.  For  that  is what nymphets
imitate--while we moan and die.
     "What's the katter with misses?" I muttered  (word-control  gone)  into
her hair.
     "If you must know," she said, "you do it the wrong way."
     "Show, wight ray."
     "All in good time," responded the spoonerette.
     Seva  ascendes,  pulsata,  brulans, kizelans, dementissima. Elevator
clatterans, pausa, clatterans, populus in corridoro.  Hanc  nisi  mors  mihi
adimet   nemo!  Juncea  puellula,  jo  pensavo  fondissime,  nobserva  nihil
quidquam; but, of course, in another moment I might have committed  some
dreadful blunder; fortunately, she returned to the treasure box.
     From  the  bathroom,  where  it took me quite a time to shift back into
normal gear for a humdrum purpose, I heard, standing, drumming, retaining my
breath, my Lolita's "oo's" and "gee's" of girlish delight.
     She had used the soap only because it was sample soap.
     "Well, come on, my dear, if you are as hungry as I am."
     And so to the elevator, daughter swinging her old white  purse,  father
walking  in  front (nota bene: never behind, she is not a lady). As we stood
(now side by side) waiting to be taken down, she threw back her head, yawned
without restraint and shook her curls.
     "When did they make you get up at that camp?"
     "Half-past--" she stifled another  yawn--"six"--yawn  in  full  with  a
shiver  of  all  her frame. "Half-past," she repeated, her throat filling up
again.
     The dining room met us with a smell of fried fat and a faded smile.  It
was a spacious and pretentious place with maudlin murals depicting enchanted
hunters  in  various  postures  and  states  of enchantment amid a medley of
pallid animals, dryads and trees. A few scattered old ladies, two clergymen,
and a man in a sports coat were finishing their meals in silence. The dining
room closed at nine, and the green-clad,  poker-faced  serving  girls  were,
happily, in a desperate hurry to get rid of us.
     "Does not he look exactly, but exactly, like Quilty?" said Lo in a soft
voice,  her sharp brown elbow not pointing, but visibly burning to point, at
the lone diner in the loud checks, in the far corner of the room.
     "Like our fat Ramsdale dentist?"
     Lo arrested the mouthful of water she had just taken, and put down  her
dancing glass.
     "Course  not,"  she  said with a splutter of mirth. "I meant the writer
fellow in the Dromes ad."
     Oh, Fame! Oh, Femina!
     When the dessert was plunked down--a huge wedge of cherry pie  for  the
young  lady  and  vanilla  ice  cream  her  protector,  most  of  which  she
expeditiously added to her pie--I produced a small  vial  containing  Papa's
Purple  Pills.  As  I look back at those seasick murals, at that strange and
monstrous moment, I can only explain my behavior then by  the  mechanism  of
that  dream vacuum wherein revolves a deranged mind; but at the time, it all
seemed quite simple and inevitable to me. I glanced around, satisfied myself
that the last diner had left, removed  the  stopped,  and  with  the  utmost
deliberation  tipped  the  philter  into  my palm. I had carefully rehearsed
before a mirror the gesture of clapping my empty hand to my open  mouth  and
swallowing  a  (fictitious)  pill.  As I expected, she pounced upon the vial
with its plump, beautifully colored capsules loaded with Beauty's Sleep.
     "Blue!" she exclaimed. "Violet blue. What are they made of?"
     "Summer skies," I said, "and plums and  figs,  and  the  grapeblood  of
emperors."
     "No, seriously--please."
     "Oh, just purpills. Vitamin X. Makes one strong as an ox or an ax. Want
to try one?"
     Lolita stretched out her hand, nodding vigorously.
     I  had  hoped the drug would work fast. It certainly did. She had had a
long long day, she had gone rowing in the morning with Barbara whose  sister
was  Waterfront  Director, as the adorable accessible nymphet now started to
tell me in between suppressed palate-humping yawns, growing  in  volume--oh,
how  fast  the  magic potion worked!--and had been active in other ways too.
The movie that had vaguely loomed in her mind was, of course, by the time we
watertreaded out of the dining room, forgotten. As we stood in the elevator,
she leaned against  me,  faintly  smiling--wouldn't  you  like  me  to  tell
you--half  closing  her  dark-lidded eyes. "Sleepy, huh?" said Uncle Tom who
was bringing up the quiet Franco-Irish gentleman and his daughter as well as
two withered women, experts in roses. They looked with sympathy at my frail,
tanned, tottering, dazed rosedarling. I had almost to  carry  her  into  our
room. There, she sat down on the edge of the bed, swaying a little, speaking
in dove-dull, long-drawn tones.
     "If   I  tell  you--if  I  tell  you,  will  you  promise  [sleepy,  so
sleepy--head lolling, eyes going out], promise you won't make complaints?"
     "Later, Lo. Now go to bed. I'll leave you here, and you go to bed. Give
you ten minutes."
     "Oh, I've been such a disgusting girl," she went on, shaking her  hair,
removing with slow fingers a velvet hair ribbon. "Lemme tell you--"
     "Tomorrow, Lo. Go to bed, go to bed--for goodness sake, to bed."
     I pocketed the key and walked downstairs.

Gentlewomen of the jury! Bear with me! Allow me to take just a tiny bit
of your  precious  time.  So  this was le grand moment. I had left my
Lolita still sitting on the edge of the abysmal bed,  drowsily  raising  her
foot, fumbling at the shoelaces and showing as she did so the nether side of
her  thigh  up  to the crotch of her panties--she had always been singularly
absentminded, or shameless, or both, in matters of legshow. This, then,  was
the  hermetic  vision  of her which I had locked in--after satisfying myself
that the door carried no inside bolt. The key, with its numbered dangler  of
carved  wood,  became  forthwith  the  weighty  sesame  to  a  rapturous and
formidable future. It was mine, it was part of my hot hairy fist. In  a  few
minutes--say, twenty, say half-an-hour, sicher ist sicher as my uncle
Gustave used to say--I would let myself into that "342" and find my nymphet,
my  beauty  and  bride,  imprisoned  in  her  crystal  sleep.  Jurors! If my
happiness could have talked, it would have filled that genteel hotel with  a
deafening  roar.  And my only regret today is that I did not quietly deposit
key "342" at the office, and leave the town, the country, the continent, the
hemisphere,--indeed, the globe--that very same night.
     Let me explain. I was  not  unduly  disturbed  by  her  self-accusatory
innuendoes.  I  was still firmly resolved to pursue my policy of sparing her
purity by operating only in the stealth of night,  only  upon  a  completely
anesthetized  little  nude. Restraint and reverence were still my motto-even
if that "purity" (incidentally, thoroughly debunked by modern  science)  had
been  slightly  damaged  through  some  juvenile erotic experience, no doubt
homosexual, at that accursed camp of hers. Of course, in  my  old-fashioned,
old-world  way, I, Jean-Jacques Humbert, had taken for granted, when I first
met her, that she was as unravished as the stereotypical notion  of  "normal
child"  had  been  since  the lamented end of the Ancient World B.C. and its
fascinating practices. We are not surrounded in our enlightened era by little
slave flowers that can be casually plucked between business and bath as they
used  to be in the days of the Romans; and we do not, as dignified Orientals
did in still more luxurious  times,  use  tiny  entertainers  fore  and  aft
between  the  mutton  and  the rose sherbet. The whole point is that the old
link between the adult world and the child world has been completely severed
nowadays by  new  customs  and  new  laws.  Despite  my  having  dabbled  in
psychiatry  and social work, I really knew very little about children. After
all, Lolita was only twelve, and no matter what concessions I made  to  time
and   place--even   bearing   in   mind   the  crude  behavior  of  American
schoolchildren--I still was under the impression that whatever went on among
those brash brats, went on at a later age, and in a  different  environment.
Therefore  (to  retrieve  the thread of this explanation) the moralist in me
by-passed  the  issue  by  clinging  to   conventional   notions   of   what
twelve-year-old  girls should be. The child therapist in me (a fake, as most
of them are--but no matter) regurgitated neo-Freudian hash and conjured up a
dreaming and  exaggerating  Dolly  in  the  "latency"  period  of  girlhood.
Finally,  the sensualist in me (a great and insane monster) had no objection
to some depravity in his  prey.  But  somewhere  behind  the  raging  bliss,
bewildered  shadows  conferred--and  not to have heeded them, this is what I
regret! Human beings, attend! I  should  have  understood  that  Lolita  had
already proved to be something quite different from innocent Annabel,
and  that  the  nymphean  evil breathing through every pore of the fey child
that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation,  would  make  the  secrecy
impossible,  and  the  delectation lethal. I should have known (by the signs
made to me by something in Lolita--the real child  Lolita  or  some  haggard
angel  behind  her  back) that nothing but pain and horror would result from
the expected rapture. Oh, winged gentlemen of the jury!
     And she was mine, she was mine, the key was in my fist, my fist was  in
my  pocket, she was mine. In the course of evocations and schemes to which I
had dedicated  so  many  insomnias,  I  had  gradually  eliminated  all  the
superfluous  blur,  and  by stacking level upon level of translucent vision,
had evolved a final picture. Naked,  except  for  one  sock  and  her  charm
bracelet,  spread-eagled  on  the  bed where my philter had felled her--so I
foreglimpsed her; a velvet hair ribbon was still clutched in her  hand;  her
honey-brown  body,  with  the white negative image of a rudimentary swimsuit
patterned against her tan, presented to me its pale breastbuds; in the  rosy
lamplight, a little pubic floss glistened on its plump hillock. The cold key
with its warm wooden addendum was in my pocket.
     I  wandered through various public rooms, glory below, gloom above: for
the look of lust always is gloomy; lust is never quite sure--even  when  the
velvety  victim  is  locked  up  in  one's dungeon--that some rival devil or
influential god may still not abolish  one's  prepared  triumph.  In  common
parlance, I needed a drink; but there was no barroom in that venerable place
full of perspiring philistines and period objects.
     I  drifted  to the Men's Room. There, a person in the clerical black--a
"hearty party" comme on dit--checking with the assistance of  Vienna,
if  it  was still there, inquired of me how I had liked Dr. Boyd's talk, and
looked puzzled when I (King Sigmund the Second) said Boyd was quite  a  boy.
Upon which, I neatly chucked the tissue paper I had been wiping my sensitive
finger tips with into the receptacle provided for it, and sallied lobbyward.
Comfortably resting my elbows on the counter, I asked Mr. Potts was he quite
sure  my  wife  had not telephoned, and what about that cot? He answered she
had not (she was dead, of course) and the cot would be installed tomorrow if
we decided to stay on. From a big crowded place  called  The  Hunters'  Hall
came  a  sound  of  many voices discussing horticulture or eternity. Another
room, called The Raspberry Room, all bathed in  light,  with  bright  little
tables  and  a  large  one with "refreshments," was still empty except for a
hostess (that type of worn woman with a glassy smile and Charlotte's  manner
of  speaking); she floated up to me to ask if I was Mr. Braddock, because if
so, Miss Beard had been looking for me. "What a name for a  woman,"  I  said
and strolled away.
     In  and  out of my heart flowed my rainbow blood. I would give her till
half-past-nine. Going back to the lobby, I found there a change: a number of
people in floral dresses or black cloth had formed little  groups  here  and
there,  and some elfish chance offered me the sight of a delightful child of
Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white,  and  there  was  a
white  ribbon  in her black hair. She was not pretty, but she was a nymphet,
and her ivory pale legs and lily neck formed for one memorable moment a most
pleasurable antiphony (in terms of spinal music) to my  desire  for  Lolita,
brown  and  pink,  flushed and fouled. The pale child noticed my gaze (which
was  really   quite   casual   and   debonair),   and   being   ridiculously
self-conscious,  lost  countenance  completely, rolling her eyes and putting
the back of her hand to her cheek, and pulling at the hem of her skirt,  and
finally  turning her thin mobile shoulder blades to me in specious chat with
her cow-like mother.
     I left the loud lobby and stood outside, on the white steps, looking at
the hundreds of powdered bugs wheeling around the lamps in the  soggy  black
night,  full  of ripple and stir. All I would do--all I would dare do--would
amount to such a trifle . . . Suddenly I was aware that in the darkness next
to me there was somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch.  I  could
not  really  see  him but what gave him away was the rasp of a screwing off,
then a discreet gurgle, then the final note of a placid screwing on.  I  was
about to move away when his voice addressed me:
     "Where the devil did you get her?"
     "I beg your pardon?"
     "I said: the weather is getting better."
     "Seems so."
     "Who's the lassie?"
     "My daughter."
     "You lie--she's not."
     "I beg your pardon?"
     "I said: July was hot. Where's her mother?"
     "Dead."
     "I  see.  Sorry.  By the way, why don't you two lunch with me tomorrow.
That dreadful crowd will be gone by then."
     "We'll be gone too. Good night."
     "Sorry. I'm pretty drunk. Good night. That child of yours needs  a  lot
of sleep. Sleep is a rose, as the Persians say. Smoke?"
     "Not now."
     He  struck  a light, but because he was drunk, or because the wind was,
the flame illumined not him but another person, a very old man, one of those
permanent guests of old hotels--and his white rocker. Nobody  said  anything
and  the  darkness returned to its initial place. Then I heard the old-timer
cough and deliver himself of some sepulchral mucus.
     I left the porch. At least half an hour in all had elapsed. I ought  to
have  asked  for a sip. The strain was beginning to tell. If a violin string
can ache, then I was that string. But it would have been unseemly to display
any hurry. As I made my way through a constellation of fixed people  in  one
corner  of the lobby, there came a blinding flash--and beaming Dr. Braddock,
two orchid-ornamentalized matrons, the small girl in white,  and  presumably
the  bared teeth of Humbert Humbert sidling between the bridelike lassie and
the enchanted cleric, were immortalized--insofar as the texture and print of
small-town newspapers  can  be  deemed  immortal.  A  twittering  group  had
gathered  near the elevator. I again chose the stairs. 342 was near the fire
escape. One could still--but the key was already in the lock, and then I was
in the room.

The door of the lighted bathroom stood ajar; in  addition  to  that,  a
skeleton  glow  came  though  the Venetian blind from the outside arclights;
these intercrossed rays penetrated the darkness of the bedroom and  revealed
the following situation.
     Clothed  in  one  of her old nightgowns, my Lolita lay on her side with
her back to me, in the middle of the bed. Her lightly veiled body  and  bare
limbs  formed  a  Z. She had put both pillows under her dark tousled head; a
band of pale light crossed her top vertebrae.
     I seemed to have shed my clothes and slipped into pajamas with the kind
of fantastic instantaneousness which is implied when  in  a  cinematographic
scene  the  process  of changing is cut; and I had already placed my knee on
the edge of the bed when Lolita turned her head and stared at me though  the
striped shadows.
     Now  this  was  something  the  intruder  had  not  expected. The whole
pill-spiel (a rather sordid affair, entre nous soit dit) had had  for
object  a  fastness of sleep that a whole regiment would not have disturbed,
and here she was staring at me, and thickly calling me  "Barbara."  Barbara,
wearing  my  pajamas  which  were  much  too  tight for her, remained poised
motionless over the little sleep-talker. Softly, with a hopeless sigh, Dolly
turned away, resuming her initial position.  For  at  least  two  minutes  I
waited  and  strained  on  the  brink,  like  that  tailor with his homemade
parachute forty years ago when about to jump  from  the  Eiffel  Tower.  Her
faint  breathing  had  the  rhythm of sleep. Finally I heaved myself onto my
narrow margin of bed, stealthily pulled at the odds and ends of sheets piled
up to the south of my stone-cold heels--and Lolita lifted her head and gaped
at me.
     As I learned later from a helpful pharmaceutist, the  purple  pill  did
not  even  belong to the big and noble family of barbiturates, and though it
might have induced sleep in a neurotic who believed it to be a potent  drug,
it  was  too mild a sedative to affect for any length of time a wary, albeit
weary, nymphet. Whether the Ramsdale doctor was a charlatan or a shrewd  old
rogue,  does  not, and did not, really matter. What mattered, was that I had
been deceived. When Lolita opened her eyes again, I realized that whether or
not the drug might work later in the night, the security I had  relied  upon
was  a  sham  one.  Slowly  her head turned away and dropped onto her unfair
amount of pillow. I lay quite still on my  brink,  peering  at  her  rumpled
hair,  at  the  glimmer  of  nymphet  flesh,  where half a haunch and half a
shoulder dimly showed, and trying to gauge the depth of  her  sleep  by  the
rate  of her respiration. Some time passed, nothing changed, and I decided I
might risk getting a little closer to that lovely and maddening glimmer; but
hardly had I moved into its warm purlieus than her breathing was  suspended,
and  I  had  the odious feeling that little Dolores was wide awake and would
explode in screams if I touched  her  with  any  part  of  my  wretchedness.
Please, reader: no matter your exasperation with the tenderhearted, morbidly
sensitive,  infinitely  circumspect  hero  of  my  book,  do  not skip these
essential pages! Imagine me; I shall not exist if you do not imagine me; try
to discern the doe in me, trembling in the forest of my own iniquity;  let's
even smile a little. After all, there is no harm in smiling. For instance (I
almost  wrote  "frinstance"),  I  had no place to rest my head, and a fit of
heartburn (they call those fries "French," grand Dieu!) was added  to
my discomfort.
     She  was  again  fast  asleep,  my nymphet, but still I did not dare to
launch  upon  my  enchanted  voyage.  La  Petite  Dormeuse   ou   l'Amant
Ridicule.  Tomorrow  I would stuff her with those earlier pills that had
so thoroughly  numbed  her  mummy.  In  the  glove  compartment--or  in  the
Gladstone  bag?  Should  I  wait  a  solid hour and then creep up again? The
science of nympholepsy is a precise science. Actual contact would do  it  in
one  second  flat.  An interspace of a millimeter would do it in ten. Let us
wait.
     There is nothing louder than an American hotel; and, mind you, this was
supposed to be a quiet, cozy, old-fashioned, homey place--"gracious  living"
and  all  that  stuff. The clatter of the elevator's gate--some twenty yards
northeast of my head but as clearly perceived as if it were inside  my  left
temple--alternated  with  the  banging  and booming of the machine's various
evolutions and lasted well beyond midnight. Every now and then,  immediately
east  of my left ear (always assuming I lay on my back, not daring to direct
my viler side toward the nebulous haunch of my bed-mate), the corridor would
brim with cheerful, resonant and inept exclamations ending in  a  volley  of
good-nights.  When  that  stopped,  a  toilet immediately north of my
cerebellum took over. It was a manly, energetic, deep-throated  toilet,  and
it  was  used  many  times. Its gurgle and gush and long afterflow shook the
wall behind me. Then someone in a southern direction was extravagantly sick,
almost coughing out his life with his liquor, and his toilet descended  like
a  veritable  Niagara, immediately beyond our bathroom. And when finally all
the waterfalls had stopped, and the enchanted hunters were sound asleep, the
avenue under the window of my insomnia, to the west  of  my  wake--a  staid,
eminently  residential,  dignified alley of huge trees--degenerated into the
despicable haunt of gigantic trucks roaring through the wet and windy night.
     And less than six inches from me and  my  burning  life,  was  nebulous
Lolita!  After  a long stirless vigil, my tentacles moved towards her again,
and this time the creak of the mattress did not  awake  her.  I  managed  to
bring  my  ravenous  bulk  so  close to her that I felt the aura of her bare
shoulder like a warm breath upon my cheek. And then,  she  sat  up,  gasped,
muttered  with  insane  rapidity something about boats, tugged at the sheets
and lapsed back into her rich, dark, young unconsciousness. As  she  tossed,
within  that  abundant flow of sleep, recently auburn, at present lunar, her
arm struck me across the face. For a second I held her.  She  freed  herself
from  the  shadow  of my embrace--doing this not consciously, not violently,
not with any personal distaste, but with the neutral plaintive murmur  of  a
child demanding its natural rest. And again the situation remained the same:
Lolita  with  her  curved  spine to Humbert, Humbert resting his head on his
hand and burning with desire and dyspepsia.
     The latter necessitated a trip to the bathroom for  a  draft  of  water
which  is  the  best  medicine  I  know in my case, except perhaps milk with
radishes; and when I re-entered  the  strange  pale-striped  fastness  where
Lolita's old and new clothes reclined in various attitudes of enchantment on
pieces  of  furniture that seemed vaguely afloat, my impossible daughter sat
up and in clear tones demanded a drink, too. She took the resilient and cold
paper cup in her shadowy hand and gulped down its contents  gratefully,  her
long  eyelashes  pointing  cupward, and then, with an infantile gesture that
carried more charm than any carnal caress,  little  Lolita  wiped  her  lips
against  my  shoulder.  She  fell  back on her pillow (I had subtracted mine
while she drank) and was instantly asleep again.
     I had not dared offer her a second helping of the  drug,  and  had  not
abandoned  hope  that the first might still consolidate her sleep. I started
to move toward her, ready for any disappointment, knowing I had better  wait
but  incapable  of waiting. My pillow smelled of her hair. I moved toward my
glimmering darling, stopping or retreating every time I thought she  stirred
or  was  about  to  stir.  A  breeze  from wonderland had begun to affect my
thoughts, and now  they  seemed  couched  in  italics,  as  if  the  surface
reflecting them were wrinkled by the phantasm of that breeze. Time and again
my  consciousness folded the wrong way, my shuffling body entered the sphere
of sleep, shuffled out again, and once or twice  I  caught  myself  drifting
into  a melancholy snore. Mists of tenderness enfolded mountains of longing.
Now and then it seemed to me that the  enchanted  prey  was  about  to  meet
halfway  the enchanted hunter, that her haunch was working its way toward me
under the soft sand of a remote and fabulous beach;  and  then  her  dimpled
dimness would stir, and I would know she was farther away from me than ever.
     If  I dwell at some length on the tremors and groupings of that distant
night, it is because I insist upon proving that I am not, and never was, and
never could have been, a brutal scoundrel. The  gentle  and  dreamy  regions
though  which  I  crept  were  the  patrimonies of poets--not crime's
prowling ground. Had I reached my goal,  my  ecstasy  would  have  been  all
softness,  a case of internal combustion of which she would hardly have felt
the heat, even if she were wide awake. But I still hoped she might gradually
be engulfed in a completeness of stupor that would allow me  to  taste  more
than  a  glimmer of her. And so, in between tentative approximations, with a
confusion of perception metamorphosing her into eyespots of moonlight  or  a
fluffy  flowering  bush, I would dream I regained consciousness, dream I lay
in wait.
     In the first antemeridian hours there was a lull in the restless  hotel
night.  Then around four the corridor toilet cascaded and its door banged. A
little after five a reverberating monologue  began  to  arrive,  in  several
installments,  from  some  courtyard  or  parking place. It was not really a
monologue,  since  the  speaker  stopped  every  few   seconds   to   listen
(presumably)  to  another fellow, but that other voice did not reach me, and
so no real meaning could be derived from the part heard. Its  matter-of-fact
intonations,  however, helped to bring in the dawn, and the room was already
suffused with lilac gray, when several industrious toilets went to work, one
after the other, and the clattering and whining elevator began to  rise  and
take  down early risers and downers, and for some minutes I miserably dozed,
and Charlotte was a mermaid in a greenish tank, and somewhere in the passage
Dr. Boyd said "Good morning to you" in a fruity voice, and birds  were  busy
in the trees, and then Lolita yawned.
     Frigid  gentlewomen  of  the  jury!  I had thought that months, perhaps
years, would elapse before I dared to reveal myself to Dolores Haze; but  by
six  she was wide awake, and by six fifteen we were technically lovers. I am
going to tell you something very strange: it was she who seduced me.
     Upon hearing her first morning yawn, I feigned handsome profiled sleep.
I just did not know what to do. Would she be shocked at finding  me  by  her
side,  and  not  in  some  spare bed? Would she collect her clothes and lock
herself up in the bathroom?  Would  she  demand  to  be  taken  at  once  to
Ramsdale--to  her  mother's  bedside--back to camp? But my Lo was a sportive
lassie. I felt her eyes on me, and when she uttered  at  last  that  beloved
chortling  note  of hers, I knew her eyes had been laughing. She rolled over
to my side, and her warm brown hair came against my  collarbone.  I  gave  a
mediocre imitation of waking up. We lay quietly. I gently caressed her hair,
and  we  gently  kissed.  Her  kiss, to my delirious embarrassment, had some
rather comical refinements of flutter and probe which made me  conclude  she
had  been  coached at an early age by a little Lesbian. No Charlie boy could
have taught her that. As if to see whether I had my fill and  learned
the  lesson, she drew away and surveyed me. Her cheekbones were flushed, her
full underlip glistened, my dissolution was near. All at once, with a  burst
of  rough  glee (the sign of the nymphet!), she put her mouth to my ear--but
for quite a while my mind could not separate into words the hot  thunder  of
her  whisper,  and she laughed, and brushed the hair off her face, and tried
again, and gradually the odd sense of living in a brand new, mad  new  dream
world, where everything was permissible, came over me as I realized what she
was  suggesting.  I  answered  I  did not know what game she and Charlie had
played. "You mean you have never--?"--her features twisted into a  stare  of
disgusted incredulity. "You have never--" she started again. I took time out
by nuzzling her a little. "Lay off, will you," she said with a twangy whine,
hastily  removing  her brown shoulder from my lips. (It was very curious the
way she considered--and kept doing so for a long time--all  caresses  except
kisses  on  the  mouth  or  the stark act of love either "romantic slosh" or
"abnormal".)
     "You mean," she persisted, now kneeling above me,  "you  never  did  it
when you were a kid?"
     "Never," I answered quite truthfully.
     "Okay," said Lolita, "here is where we start."
     However, I shall not bore my learned readers with a detailed account of
Lolita's  presumption.  Suffice  it to say that not a trace of modesty did I
perceive  in  this  beautiful  hardly  formed   young   girl   whom   modern
co-education,  juvenile  mores, the campfire racket and so forth had utterly
and hopelessly depraved.  She  saw  the  stark  act  merely  as  part  of  a
youngster's  furtive  world, unknown to adults. What adults did for purposes
of procreation was no business of hers. My life was handled by little Lo  in
an  energetic,  matter-of-fact  manner  as  if  it  were an insensate gadget
unconnected with me. While eager to impress me with the world of tough kids,
she was not quite prepared for certain discrepancies between  a  kid's  life
and  mine.  Pride  alone  prevented  her  from giving up; for, in my strange
predicament, I feigned supreme stupidity and had her have her way--at  least
while  I  could still bear it. But really these are irrelevant matters; I am
not concerned with  so-called  "sex"  at  all.  Anybody  can  imagine  those
elements  of  animality. A greater endeavor lures me on: to fix once for all
the perilous magic of nymphets.

I have to tread carefully. I have  to  speak  in  a  whisper.  Oh  you,
veteran crime reporter, you grave old usher, you once popular policeman, now
in  solitary  confinement  after gracing that school crossing for years, you
wretched emeritus read to by a boy! It would never do, would it, to have you
fellows fall madly in love with my Lolita! had I been  a  painter,  had  the
management  of  The  Enchanted  Hunters  lost  its  mind  one summer day and
commissioned me to redecorate their  dining  room  with  murals  of  my  own
making, this is what I might have thought up, let me list some fragments:
     There  would  have  been  a  lake.  There  would  have been an arbor in
flame-flower. There would have been nature studies--a tiger pursuing a  bird
of  paradise,  a  choking snake sheathing whole the flayed trunk of a shoat.
There would have been a sultan, his face expressing great agony (belied,  as
it  were, by his molding caress), helping a callypygean slave child to climb
a column of onyx. There would have been those luminous globules  of  gonadal
glow  that  travel  up  the opalescent sides of juke boxes. There would have
been all kinds of camp activities on the part  of  the  intermediate  group,
Canoeing,  Coranting,  Combing  Curls  in the lakeside sun. There would have
been poplars, apples, a suburban Sunday. There would have been a  fire  opal
dissolving  within  a ripple-ringed pool, a last throb, a last dab of color,
stinging red, smearing pink, a sigh, a wincing child.

I am trying to describe these things not to relive them in  my  present
boundless  misery,  but  to  sort out the portion of hell and the portion of
heaven in that strange, awful, maddening world--nymphet  love.  The  beastly
and beautiful merged at one point, and it is that borderline I would like to
fix, and I feel I fail to do so utterly. Why?
     The  stipulation  of the Roman law, according to which a girl may marry
at twelve, was adopted  by  the  Church,  and  is  still  preserved,  rather
tacitly,  in  some  of  the United States. And fifteen is lawful everywhere.
There is nothing wrong, say both hemispheres, when a brute of forty, blessed
by the local priest and bloated with drink, sheds his sweat-drenched  finery
and  thrusts  himself  up  to  the  hilt  into  his youthful bride. "In such
stimulating temperate climates [says an old magazine in this prison library]
as St. Louis, Chicago and Cincinnati, girls mature about the  end  of  their
twelfth  year."  Dolores  Haze  was  born less than three hundred miles from
stimulating Cincinnati. I have but followed nature. I am  nature's  faithful
hound.  Why  then  this horror that I cannot shake off? Did I deprive her of
her flower? Sensitive gentlewomen of the jury, I  was  not  even  her  first
lover.

She  told  me  the  way she had been debauched. We ate flavorless mealy
bananas, bruised  peaches  and  very  palatable  potato  chips,  and  die
Kleine  told  me  everything.  Her  voluble  but  disjointed account was
accompanied by many a droll moue. As I think I have already observed,
I especially remember one wry face on an "ugh!" basis: jelly-mouth distended
sideways and eyes rolled up in a routine blend of comic disgust, resignation
and tolerance for young frailty.
     Her astounding  tale  started  with  an  introductory  mention  of  her
tent-mate  of  the  previous summer, at another camp, a "very select" one as
she put it. That tent-mate ("quite a derelict character," "half-crazy,"  but
a  "swell  kid") instructed her in various manipulations. At first, loyal Lo
refused to tell me her name.
     "Was it Grace Angel?" I asked.
     She shook her head. No, it wasn't it was the daughter of  a  big  shot.
He--
     "Was it perhaps Rose Carmine?"
     "No, of course not. Her father--"
     "Was it, then, Agnes Sheridan perchance?"
     She swallowed and shook her head--and then did a double take.
     "Say, how come you know all those kids?"
     I explained.
     "Well,"  she said. "They are pretty bad, some of that school bunch, but
not that bad. If you have to know, her name was Elizabeth Talbot,  she  goes
now to a swanky private school, her father is an executive."
     I  recalled  with  a funny pang the frequency with which poor Charlotte
used to introduce into party chat such elegant tidbits as "when my  daughter
was out hiking last year with the Talbot girl."
     I wanted to know if either mother learned of those sapphic diversions?
     "Gosh  no,"  exhaled  limp  Lo  mimicking  dread and relief, pressing a
falsely fluttering hand to her chest.
     I was more interested, however, in  heterosexual  experience.  She  had
entered  the  sixth  grade at eleven, soon after moving to Ramsdale from the
Middle West. What did she mean by "pretty bad"?
     Well, the Miranda twins had shared the same bed for years,  and  Donald
Scott,  who  was the dumbest boy in the school, had done it with Hazel Smith
in his uncle's garage, and Kenneth Knight--who was  the  brightest--used  to
exhibit himself wherever and whenever he had a chance, and--
     "Let us switch to Camp Q," I said. And presently I got the whole story.
     Barbara  Burke,  a sturdy blond, two years older than Lo and by far the
camp's best swimmer, had a very special  canoe  which  she  shared  with  Lo
"because  I  was  the  only  other  girl who could make Willow Island" (some
swimming test, I imagine). Through July, every morning--mark, reader,  every
blessed morning--Barbara and Lo would be helped to carry the boat to Onyx or
Eryx  (two  small  lakes  in the wood) by Charlie Holmes, the camp mistress'
son, aged thirteen--and the only human male for a  couple  of  miles  around
(excepting  an old meek stone-deaf handyman, and a farmer in an old Ford who
sometimes sold the campers eggs as  farmers  will);  every  morning,  oh  my
reader,  the  three  children  would  take a short cut through the beautiful
innocent forest brimming with all the emblems of youth, dew, birdsongs,  and
at one point, among the luxuriant undergrowth, Lo would be left as sentinel,
while Barbara and the boy copulated behind a bush.
     At  first,  Lo had refused "to try what it was like," but curiosity and
camaraderie prevailed, and soon she and Barbara were doing it by turns  with
the  silent, coarse and surly but indefatigable Charlie, who had as much sex
appeal  as  a  raw  carrot  but  sported   a   fascinating   collection   of
contraceptives  which  he  used  to  fish  out  of  a  third  nearby lake, a
considerably larger and more populous one, called  Lake  Climax,  after  the
booming  young factory town of that name. Although conceding it was "sort of
fun" and "fine for the complexion," Lolita, I am glad to say, held Charlie's
mind and manners in the greatest contempt.  Nor  had  her  temperament  been
roused  by  that  filthy  fiend.  In fact, I think he had rather stunned it,
despite the "fun."
     By that time it was close to ten. With the ebb of lust, an ashen  sense
of  awfulness,  abetted  by  the realistic drabness of a gray neuralgic day,
crept over me and hummed within my temples.  Brown,  naked,  frail  Lo,  her
narrow  white  buttocks  to me, her sulky face to a door mirror, stood, arms
akimbo, feet (in new slippers with pussy-fur tops) wide apart, and through a
forechanging lock tritely mugged at herself in the glass. From the  corridor
came  the  cooing voices of colored maids at work, and presently there was a
mild attempt to open the door of our room. I had Lo go to the  bathroom  and
take  a much-needed soap shower. The bed was a frightful mess with overtones
of potato chips. She tried on a  two-piece  navy  wool,  then  a  sleeveless
blouse  with  a  swirly clathrate skirt, but the first was too tight and the
second too ample, and when I begged her  to  hurry  up  (the  situation  was
beginning  to  frighten  me),  Lo viciously sent those nice presents of mine
hurtling into a corner, and put on yesterday's dress. When she was ready  at
last,  I  gave  her  a  lovely  new  purse of simulated calf (in which I had
slipped quite a few pennies and two mint-bright dimes) and told her  to  buy
herself a magazine in the lobby.
     "I'll  be  down  in  a  minute," I said. "And if I were you, my dear, I
would not talk to strangers."
     Except for my poor little gifts, there was not much to pack; but I  was
forced  to  devote  a  dangerous  amount  of  time  (was she up to something
downstairs?) to arranging the bed in such a way as to suggest the  abandoned
nest   of  a  restless  father  and  his  tomboy  daughter,  instead  of  an
ex-convict's saturnalia with a couple of fat old  whores.  Then  I  finished
dressing and had the hoary bellboy come up for the bags.
     Everything  was  fine.  There,  in  the  lobby,  she  sat,  deep  in an
overstuffed blood-red armchair, deep in a lurid movie magazine. A fellow  of
my age in tweeds (the genre of the place had changed overnight to a spurious
country-squire  atmosphere) was staring at my Lolita over his dead cigar and
stale newspaper. She wore her professional white socks and  saddle  oxfords,
and  that  bright  print  frock  with  the  square throat; a splash of jaded
lamplight brought out the golden down on her warm  brown  limbs.  There  she
sat,  her  legs carelessly highcrossed, and her pale eyes skimming along the
lines with every now and then a blink. Bill's wife had worshipped  him  from
afar  long  before  they  ever met: in fact, she used to secretly admire the
famous young actor as he ate sundaes in Schwab's  drugstore.  Nothing  could
have been more childish than her snubbed nose, freckled face or the purplish
spot  on  her  naked  neck  where  a  fairytale  vampire had feasted, or the
unconscious movement of her tongue exploring a touch of rosy rash around her
swollen lips; nothing could be more harmless than to  read  about  Jill,  an
energetic  starlet  who  made  her  own clothes and was a student of serious
literature; nothing could be more innocent than  the  part  in  that  glossy
brown  hair  with  that  silky  sheen  on  the temple; nothing could be more
naive--But what sickening envy the lecherous fellow whoever he was--come  to
think  of  it,  he  resembled  a little my Swiss uncle Gustave, also a great
admirer of le dиcouvert--would have experienced  had  he  known  that
every  nerve  in  me  was  still  anointed  and  ringed with the feel of her
body--the body of some immortal demon disguised as a female child.
     Was pink pig Mr. Swoon absolutely sure my wife had not  telephoned?  He
was.  If she did, would he tell her we had gone on to Aunt Clare's place? He
would, indeedie. I settled the bill and roused Lo from her chair.  She  read
to  the  car. Still reading, she was driven to a so-called coffee shop a few
blocks south. Oh, she ate all right. She even laid  aside  her  magazine  to
eat, but a queer dullness had replaced her usual cheerfulness. I knew little
Lo  could  be  very  nasty, so I braced myself and grinned, and waited for a
squall. I was unbathed, unshaven, and had had no bowel movement.  My  nerves
were  a-jangle.  I  did  not  like  the  way my little mistress shrugged her
shoulders and distended her nostrils when I attempted casual small talk. Had
Phyllis been in the know before she joined her parents  in  Maine?  I  asked
with  a smile. "Look," said Lo making a weeping grimace, "let us get off the
subject." I then tried--also unsuccessfully, no  matter  how  I  smacked  my
lips--to interest her in the road map. Our destination was, let me remind my
patient  reader  whose  meek temper Lo ought to have copied, the gay town of
Lepingville, somewhere near a hypothetical hospital. That destination was in
itself a perfectly arbitrary one (as, alas, so many were to be), and I shook
in my shoes as I wondered how to keep the whole arrangement  plausible,  and
what  other  plausible  objectives  to  invent after we had taken in all the
movies in Lepingville. More and more uncomfortable did Humbert Feel. It  was
something  quite special, that feeling: an oppressive, hideous constraint as
if I were sitting with the small ghost of somebody I had just killed.
     As she was in the act of getting back into the car,  an  expression  of
pain  flitted  across Lo's face. It flitted again, more meaningfully, as she
settled down beside me. No doubt, she reproduced it that second time for  my
benefit.  Foolishly,  I asked her what was the matter. "Nothing, you brute,"
she replied. "You  what?"  I  asked.  She  was  silent.  Leaving  Briceland.
Loquacious  Lo  was silent. Cold spiders of panic crawled down my back. This
was an orphan. This was  a  lone  child,  an  absolute  waif,  with  whom  a
heavy-limbed,  foul-smelling adult had had strenuous intercourse three times
that very morning. Whether or not the realization of a  lifelong  dream  had
surpassed  all  expectation,  it  had,  in  a  sense, overshot its mark--and
plunged into a nightmare. I had been careless, stupid, and ignoble. And  let
me  be  quite frank: somewhere at the bottom of that dark turmoil I felt the
writhing of desire again, so monstrous was my appetite  for  that  miserable
nymphet.  Mingled with the pangs of guilt was the agonizing through that her
mood might prevent me from making love to her again as soon  as  I  found  a
nice  country  road  where  to  park  in peace. In other words, poor Humbert
Humbert was dreadfully unhappy,  and  while  steadily  and  inanely  driving
toward  Lepingville,  he  kept  racking  his brains for some quip, under the
bright wing of which he might  dare  turn  to  his  seatmate.  It  was  she,
however, who broke the silence:
     "Oh, a squashed squirrel," she said. "What a shame."
     "Yes, isn't it?" (eager, hopeful Hum).
     "Let  us  stop at the next gas station," Lo continued. "I want to go to
the washroom."
     "We shall stop wherever you want,"  I  said.  And  then  as  a  lovely,
lonely,  supercilious  grove  (oaks, I thought; American trees at that stage
were beyond me) started to echo greenly the rush of our car, a red and ferny
road on our right turned its head before slanting into the woodland,  and  I
suggested we might perhaps--
     "Drive on," my Lo cried shrilly.
     "Righto. Take it easy." (Down, poor beast, down.)
     I glanced at her. Thank God, the child was smiling.
     "You  chump," she said, sweetly smiling at me. "You revolting creature.
I was a daisy-fresh girl, and look what you've done to me. I ought  to  call
the police and tell them you raped me. Oh, you dirty, dirty old man."
     Was  she just joking? An ominous hysterical note rang through her silly
words. Presently, making  a  sizzling  sound  with  her  lips,  she  started
complaining  of  pains,  said  she  could not sit, said I had torn something
inside her. The sweat rolled down my neck,  and  we  almost  ran  over  some
little animal or other that was crossing the road with tail erect, and again
my  vile-tempered  companion  called me an ugly name. When we stopped at the
filling station, she scrambled out without a word and was a long time  away.
Slowly,   lovingly,   an   elderly  friend  with  a  broken  nose  wiped  my
windshield--they do it differently at every place,  from  chamois  cloth  to
soapy brush, this fellow used a pink sponge.
     She  appeared at last. "Look," she said in that neutral voice that hurt
me so, "give me some dimes and nickels.  I  want  to  call  mother  in  that
hospital. What's the number?"
     "Get in," I said. "You can't call that number."
     "Why?"
     "Get in and slam the door."
     She  got  in  and slammed the door. The old garage man beamed at her. I
swung onto the highway.
     "Why can't I call my mother if I want to?"
     "Because," I answered, "your mother is dead."

In the gay town of Lepingville I bought her four books of comics, a box
of candy, a box of sanitary pads, two cokes, a manicure set, a travel  clock
with  a  luminous  dial,  a  ring with a real topaz, a tennis racket, roller
skates with white high shoes, field glasses, a portable radio  set,  chewing
gum,  a  transparent  raincoat,  sunglasses,  some  more garments--swooners,
shorts, all kinds of summer frocks. At the hotel we had separate rooms,  but
in  the  middle  of  the night she came sobbing into mine, and we made it up
very gently. You see, she had absolutely nowhere else to go.
